RO 


HAT  WA 


GIFT  OF 


Morocco   that  Was 


MULAI    ABDUL    AZIZ. 


Morocco  that  Was 


BY 


WALTER  B.  HARRIS 


WITH  ILLUSTRATIONS 


William    Blackwood   and   Sons 

Edinburgh  and  London 

1921 


' 


CONTENTS. 


THE  MOORISH  COURT — 

I.   THE  ACCESSION   OF  MULAI  ABDUL  AZIZ    .            .  1 

n.   LIFE   AT  THE  MOORISH  COURT           ...  32 

HI.    THE  ROAD   TO   RUIN         „            ....  65 

IV.   THE  BEGINNING  OF  THE  END            ...  91 

V.  THE  LIQUIDATION   OF  THE  SULTANATE      .            .  119 

VI.   THE  SULTAN  AT  HOME 140 

VH.  THE  SULTAN  IN  FRANCE          V          .            .            .  160 

RAISULI            ....            .            .            .            .  179 

SAINTS,   SHEREEFS,  AND   SINNERS       ....  265 

CHANGES  AND   CHANCES              ,                        .            .  291 


495010 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


MULAI  ABDUL  AZIZ Frontispiece 

MOUNTAIN-TOPS,  ATLAS      ....     Facing  p.  10 

From  photo  by  Author. 

COURTYARD   OF  PACHA 'S  PALACE,  MARRAKESH  „  38 

From  photo  by  Felix,  Marrakeeh  (Maroc). 

MARRAKESH ,,60 

From  photo  by  Felix,  Marrakeeh,  (Maruc). 

THE  WALLS  OF  FEZ ,,64 

From  photo  by  Service  des  Beaux- Arts,  Morocco. 

TROOPS    GUARDING   THE   AUTHOR'S  VILLA  AT 

TANGIER ,,76 

From  photo  by  Author. 

GATE  OF  MANSOUR  EL-ALJ,  MEKNE*S  .     .      „    101 

From  photo  by  Author. 

MEDERSA  OF  ATTARINE,  FEZ         .  .  .  „  110 

From  photo  by  Service  des  Beaux-Arts,  Morocco. 

MULAI  HAFID „          120 

FEZ  FROM  THE   SOUTH  .  .  .  .  „  136 

From  photo  by  Service  des  Beaux-Arts,  Morocco. 


Vlll 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


RABAT 


From  photo  by  Service  des  Beaux- Arts,  Morocco. 


BERBER  TRIBESMEN   OF   THE  MIDDLE  ATLAS 

From  photo  by  Service  des  Beaux-Arts,  Morocco. 

THE     AUTHOR,     EL     AOUFI,     AND     RAISULl'S 
BRIGANDS 

From  photo  by  Madame  de  Beaumarchait. 

THE     AUTHOR     MEASURING     THE    WALLS     OF 
THE  RUINS   OF  RAISULl'S  HOUSE    . 

From  photo  by  Madame  de  Beaumarchais. 

MY  CARAVAN   CROSSING  THE  ATLAS 

From  photo  by  Author. 

COURT  OF  KAmOUIN  MOSQUE,  FEZ 

From  photo  by  Service  des  Beaux-Arts,  Morocco. 

A  FRENCH   "  POSTE  "  IN  THE  ATLAS     . 

From  photo  by  Service  des  Beaux-Arts,  Morocco. 

AN  ATLAS  CASTLE 

From  photo  by  Lord  Loch. 

ROOM  IN  THE  PACHA 'S  PALACE,  MARRAKESH 

From  photo  by  Felix,  Marrakech  (Maroc). 


.  Facing  p.  160 
194 


220 

232 
272 
290 
304 
322 


MOROCCO    THAT    WAS. 


THE   MOORISH   COURT. 


THE   ACCESSION   OF  MULAI  ABDUL   AZIZ. 

MY  first  introduction  to  the  Moorish  Court  was 
in  1887,  only  a  very  few  months  after  my  arrival 
in  Morocco,  when  I  was  invited  by  the  British 
Minister,  the  late  Sir  William  Kirby-Green,  to 
accompany  his  special  Mission  to  the  Sultan. 

Mulai  Hassen  was  then  at  the  zenith  of  his 
power.  He  was  a  "  strong "  Sultan,  probably 
cruel,  and  certainly  capable.  His  energy  was 
never-failing,  and  he  maintained  order  amongst 
his  lawless  tribes  and  stamped  out  the  constantly 
occurring  revolts  by  an  almost  unceasing  "pro- 
gress "  through  the  country,  accompanied  by  his 
rabble  of  an  army.  He  seldom  spent  six  months 
together  in  any  of  his  several  capitals,  and  the 
Moors  had  a  saying,  "  The  Imperial  tents  are 
never  stored." 

The  great  labour,  the  enormous  transport  that 
these  journeyings  necessitated,  is  difficult  to  appre- 

A 


2  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

ciate.  Not  only  was  the  Sultan  accompanied  by 
his  numerous  ladies  and  all  his  viziers  and  their 
families  and  suites,  but  he  had  with  him  as  well 
some  ten  thousand  soldiers  and  a  rabble  of  camp- 
followers.  A  large  number  of  native  merchants 
also  joined  the  throng,  for  trade  flowed  to  the 
region  in  which  the  Court  was  residing. 

Some  idea  of  the  results  upon  the  country 
passed  through  can  be  imagined  from  the  fact 
that  the  very  name  of  these  expeditions  in  Arabic 
is  "  Harka,"  "  the  burning."  No  matter  whether 
the  tribes  were  in  incipient  rebellion,  in  open 
revolt,  or  in  peace,  they  had  to  provide  the  food 
and  fodder  of  this  great  horde,  whose  ravages 
more  nearly  resembled  those  of  a  flight  of  locusts 
than  the  passing  by  of  human  beings.  Not  only 
such  "  legal "  taxation  as  could  be  extorted  was 
collected,  but  the  viziers  and  the  Sultan's  entour- 
age had  to  be  bribed  and  paid  as  well,  while 
every  soldier  and  every  camp-follower  pillaged  on 
his  own  account.  On  receiving  the  news  of  the 
coming  of  one  of  these  Imperial  expeditions,  as 
many  of  the  population  as  could,  or  as  dared, 
fled  to  other  regions  ;  and  the  Sultan  often  passed 
through  a  deserted  country,  except  that  the 
Governor  and  tribal  representatives  had  to  be 
there  to  pour  the  little  wealth  of  the  countryside 
into  the  royal  coffers. 

Morocco  was  still  an  almost  unknown  country 
in  those  days.  Europe  paid  little  attention  to 
what  was  passing  within  its  boundaries,  and  so 
long  as  the  Sultan's  actions  didn't  threaten  to 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  3 

complicate  international  questions,  he  was  allowed 
to  go  his  own  way.  The  rivalry  of  Great  Britain 
and  France  was  its  outstanding  feature,  together 
with  the  constantly  recurring  quarrels  and  petty 
local  wars  of  Spain  with  the  tribes  that  surround 
her  "  Presidios  "  on  the  northern  coast.  Morocco 
lived  its  life  apart.  True,  it  was  at  the  very  gates 
of  the  Mediterranean,  but  it  might  have  been  in 
the  Pacific  for  all  the  attention  that  it  attracted. 
From  time  to  time  the  European  Governments 
despatched  special  Missions  to  the  Sultan — gigantic 
picnics  to  one  or  other  of  the  capitals,  during 
which  the  pending  claims  would,  or  would  not, 
be  settled ;  a  commercial  treaty  was  possibly 
discussed ;  eternal  friendship  was  sworn  where 
only  hatred  on  one  side  and  indifference  on  the 
other  really  existed,  for  in  those  days  the  general 
feelings  of  the  Moors  toward  the  Europeans  and 
Christians  amounted  to  hate. 

Sir  William  Kirby-Green's  special  Mission  pro- 
ceeded by  sea  to  Mazagan,  conveyed  by  a  British 
warship,  and  thence  overland  to  Marrakesh,  the 
Sultan  having,  as  the  custom  was,  sent  an  escort, 
transport,  and  tents  to  the  coast  for  this 
purpose. 

However  rotten  the  state  of  Morocco  may  have 
been  at  that  time,  Mulai  Hassen's  strong  hand 
held  its  fabric  together,  and  presented  to  the 
outside  world  a  front  of  great  dignity.  The 
British  Mission  travelled  amongst  the  tribes  in 
perfect  security,  and  was  received  with  all  honour 
and  with  pretended  rejoicings.  Compliments 


4  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

flowed  as  fast  as  mountain  streams — happy  in 
their  wording,  sonorous  in  their  utterance,  and 
absolutely  insincere. 

And  then,  in  mingled  dust  and  sunshine,  the 
entry  into  the  southern  capital ;  the  threading 
of  its  narrow  streets ;  the  throng  of  onlookers  ; 
the  almost  hopeless  crush  of  horses  and  mules 
and  men ;  and  our  arrival  in  the  great  garden 
of  olives  and  oranges  which  surrounded  the  kiosks 
of  the  Maimounieh  Palace,  in  which  the  Mission 
was  housed  during  its  stay  at  Marrakesh. 

The  reception  of  foreign  envoys  by  the  Sultan 
formed  a  pageant  of  much  magnificence.  Only 
a  very  few  years  later  the  whole  formality  was 
changed,  and  the  representatives  of  the  Govern- 
ments of  Europe  were  no  longer  received  as  vassals 
bringing  tribute.  But  as  long  as  the  old  etiquette 
lasted,  there  could  be  no  question  about  the 
splendour  of  the  ceremony.  It  may  have  been 
derogatory,  and  no  doubt  was,  for  the  represen- 
tatives of  the  Great  Powers  of  Europe  to  stand 
bareheaded  in  the  sun  while  the  Sultan,  under  a 
crimson  parasol,  remained  on  horseback ;  but  no 
one  could  dispute  the  picturesqueness  of  the  scene 
or  its  oriental  dignity. 

The  great  square  of  the  palace,  covering  many 
acres,  in  which  the  reception  took  place,  was 
surrounded  by  yellow  walls,  here  and  there  pierced 
by  gateways.  At  one  end,  above  these  walls, 
appeared  the  flat  terraces  and  green-tiled  roofs  of 
the  palace,  at  the  other  extremity  the  cypress- 
and  olive-trees  of  the  great  park  of  the  Agdal ; 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  5 

while  away  to  the  south,  towering  high  into  the 
morning  sunlight,  rose  the  snow-covered  peaks  of 
the  Atlas  Mountains.  A  fitter  mise  en  scene  for 
a  great  pageant  could  scarcely  be  imagined. 

The  great  square  was  lined  with  troops,  ragged 
and  parti-coloured,  some  in  uniform  and  some 
out  of  it,  and  some  in  uniform  so  ragged  that 
they  were  as  much  out  of  it  as  in  it.  Others, 
again,  in  brilliant  costumes  of  every  colour,  evi- 
dently made  and  served  out  for  the  occasion. 
In  detail  much  was  wanting,  perhaps ;  in  general 
effect  it  was  a  rainbow.  Into  the  centre  of  this 
square  the  British  Minister  and  his  suite  were 
ushered  by  high  white-robed  functionaries  of  the 
Court,  while  close  behind  the  little  group  of 
uniformed  Europeans  were  piled  the  cases  of 
presents  sent  by  the  British  Government  to  His 
Shereefian  Majesty.  In  fact,  the  whole  traditional 
ceremony  was  based  upon  the  reception  of  vassals 
and  the  offering  of  tribute. 

A  blast  of  trumpets,  and  the  great  green  gates 
of  the  palace  are  hurled  open,  and  a  hurried 
throng  of  Court  attendants,  in  white  robes  and 
crimson-peaked  fezes,  emerges.  A  band  of  shrill 
music — pipes  and  drums — bursts  into  noise.  Ban- 
ners and  wand-bearers  and  spear-bearers  follow, 
and  black  grooms  leading  horses,  saddled  and 
caparisoned  in  gay  silks  and  gold  embroideries, 
which  prance  and  neigh  at  the  dust  and  noise. 
Then  the  Sultan,  a  stately  figure  in  white,  on  a 
white  horse  trapped  in  green  and  gold.  Over  his 
head  is  borne  the  great  flat  parasol  of  State,  of 


6  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

crimson  velvet  and  gold,  while  at  his  side  attend- 
ants wave  long  white  scarves  to  keep  the  flies 
off  his  sacred  person.  After  him  follow  his  viziers, 
portly  gentlemen  swathed  in  soft  white  hanging 
garments,  and  then  more  Court  attendants  and 
slaves. 

As  the  sacred  presence  of  the  Sultan  passes  into 
the  public  square  a  great  shout  rends  the  air, 
and  the  bowing  crowd  cries,  "  May  God  protect 
the  life  of  our  Lord." 

As  the  procession  approaches  the  group  of  the 
British  Mission  it  divides  to  right  and  left,  and 
the  Sultan  advances,  accompanied  only  by  his 
Chamberlain  and  one  or  two  attendants,  and 
followed  by  his  viziers.  The  members  of  the 
Mission  bow  and  salute,  and  the  Chamberlain 
presents  the  Minister  to  His  Majesty,  who  bids 
him  welcome.  Sir  William  Kirby-Green  then  read 
his  speech,  and  handed  his  credentials  to  His 
Majesty,  wrapped  up  in  silk.  The  Sultan  took 
them,  holding  the  folds  of  his  cloak  between  his 
sacred  fingers  and  the  infidel  documents  !  The 
suite  is  presented,  and  after  another  word  or  two 
of  welcome  on  the  part  of  the  Sultan,  His  Majesty 
turns  his  horse  and  retires  again  to  the  precincts 
of  his  palace,  amid  the  cries  of  his  people,  the 
booming  of  cannon,  and  the  shrill  blast  of  native 
music. 

It  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  give  here  a  brief 
account  of  how  this  ceremony  came  to  be  abolished. 
I  was  attached,  in  1902,  to  Sir  Arthur  Nicolson's 
special  Mission  to  the  Sultan  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  at 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  7 

Rabat.  There  had  for  some  time  been  a  strong 
feeling  on  the  part  of  the  European  Governments 
that  some  new  ceremonial  should  replace  the 
traditional  form  of  the  reception  of  the  represen- 
tatives of  the  Powers,  and  I  was  sent  to  Rabat, 
a  week  in  advance  of  the  Mission,  to  urge  upon 
the  Sultan  the  expediency  of  this  change.  I  was 
at  that  time  upon  very  intimate  and  friendly 
terms  with  His  Majesty,  and  had  ample  oppor- 
tunity to  put  these  views  before  him.  Mulai 
Abdul  Aziz  always  had,  and  has,  the  true  instincts 
of  a  great  gentleman,  and  he  agreed  readily  that 
the  form  of  reception  in  vogue  at  his  Court  was 
derogatory  to  the  position  and  dignity  of  a  special 
envoy  from  the  Sovereign  and  Government  of 
Great  Britain.  At  the  same  time,  he  main- 
tained that  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  introduce 
radical  changes  in  Court  etiquette  without  creat- 
ing a  hostile  feeling  amongst  the  people,  or  at 
least  running  the  risk  of  much  criticism.  For 
a  few  days  he  hesitated ;  but  the  evening  before 
the  arrival  of  the  Mission  he  authorised  me  to 
inform  Sir  Arthur  Nicolson  that  the  old  cere- 
monial would  no  longer  be  carried  out,  and  that 
his  reception  would  take  place  in  a  room  in  the 
palace.  In  order  to  explain  the  change  of  pro- 
cedure, it  was  allowed  to  be  whispered  in  the 
town  that  His  Majesty  was  a  little  unwell,  and 
unable  to  stand  the  fatigue  of  the  great  function 
in  the  open  air. 

The  reception  accordingly  took  place  in  an  upper 
room  of  the  palace.    The  young  Sultan  was  seated 


8  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

cross-legged  on  a  pale  blue  Louis  XV.  sofa,  the 
greater  part  of  which  was  covered  by  his  out- 
spread robes.  At  his  side  stood  his  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs  and  his  viziers.  The  Chamberlain 
introduced  the  British  Minister,  who  read  his 
speech  in  English,  the  interpretation  being  made 
by  an  official  of  the  Legation.  The  Sultan  whis- 
pered his  reply  to  the  Foreign  Minister,  who  spoke 
it  out  aloud. 

The  scene  was  attractive,  and  of  course  much 
more  "  intimate "  than  the  great  ceremonial  of 
the  past,  but  was  never  lacking  in  dignity.  The 
"  audience,"  confined  strictly  to  the  reception, 
lasted  only  a  very  few  minutes,  when  the  Minister 
and  his  suite  retired.  As  we  were  proceeding 
down  the  staircase,  I  was  hurriedly  called  back 
into  the  Sultan's  presence.  He  had  thrown  ofT 
the  great  white  cloak  in  which  he  had  been  almost 
enveloped,  and  discarded  his  heavy  turban  of 
State  for  one  of  much  less  weighty  dimensions. 
His  viziers  and  courtiers  had  departed.  Calling 
to  me  to  come  quickly,  he  cried,  "  Climb  up  here 
with  me,  on  to  the  back  of  the  sofa ;  we  shall 
be  able  to  see  the  Mission  ride  out  of  the  palace 
square" ;  and  he  clambered  up  and  stood  on  the 
gilt  carving  of  his  throne,  whence,  by  pulling  him- 
self up  by  his  hands,  he  could  just  see  out  of  a 
little  window  high  up  in  the  richly-decorated  wall 
of  the  room.  Following  his  example,  I  mounted 
beside  him,  and  together  we  watched  the  Minister 
and  the  Mission  mount  their  horses  and  depart 
from  the  palace,  to  the  booming  of  guns. 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  9 

At  the  time  of  my  first  visit  to  the  Court,  Si 
Ahmed  ben  Moussa,  better  known  as  Bou  Ahmed, 
was  the  predominant  figure  amongst  the  native 
officials.  He  held  at  this  time  the  post  of  Cham- 
berlain, one  of  great  importance  and  influence, 
as  its  holder  was  in  constant  contact  with  the 
Sultan,  and  could  gain  his  private  ear.  He  was 
undoubtedly  devoted  to  the  Sultan's  interests,  and 
served  him  faithfully  and  well.  His  father  had 
been  a  palace  slave,  and  he  himself  was  very 
dark  in  colour,  and  of  most  unattractive  appear- 
ance. He  was  a  man  of  no  particular  intelligence, 
but  of  indomitable  will,  and  cruel.  He  made  no 
pretensions  to  understand  the  foreign  relations  of 
Morocco;  and  except  in  so  far  as  he  was  anti- 
European,  more  from  political  than  religious 
motives,  he  seems  to  have  had  no  fixed  policy. 
Even  later,  when  he  became,  under  Mulai  Abdul 
Aziz,  Grand  Vizier,  he  was  content  to  leave  the 
discussion  of  all  affairs  of  foreign  policy  to  the 
other  viziers,  though  no  doubt  he  took  part  in 
the  decisions  arrived  at.  Mulai  Hassen's  Foreign 
Minister  was  Sid  Fadhoul  Gharnit,  a  wily  and 
intelligent  gentleman,  who  is  still  living.  When 
the  Government  of  which  he  was  a  member  fell 
— and  the  falls  of  Government  in  those  days  often 
meant  the  falling  of  heads  too — Sid  Fadhoul 
Gharnit  was  seized  by  a  stroke,  and  disappeared 
into  the  recesses  of  his  house.  For  years  he  was 
supposed  to  be  paralysed,  and  was  no  doubt  in 
bad  health  ;  but  another  change  of  Ministry  came 
about  years  afterwards,  and  he  emerged  again, 


10  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

miraculously  cured  and  looking  younger  and  more 
xspry  than  ever,  to  become  Grand  Vizier  for  a  time. 
He  has  now  retired  from  public  life,  and  resides 
in  Fez.  No  doubt  his  paralysis,  real  or  feigned, 
saved  his  family  from  ruin,  his  fortune  from  con- 
fiscation, and  probably  himself  from  prison  or 
even  death.  Difficult  as  was  the  work,  great  as 
were  the  responsibilities  of  Cabinet  Ministers  in 
Morocco,  they  were  not  pestered  by  an  Opposi- 
tion, for  if — rarely — any  members  of  the  outgoing 
Government  survived,  they  were  always  in  prison. 

In  1893  Mulai  Hassen  determined  to  visit  the 
desert  regions  of  Morocco,  including  far-off  Tafilet, 
the  great  oasis  from  which  his  dynasty  had  origi- 
nally sprung,  and  where,  before  becoming  the  ruling 
branch  of  the  royal  family,  they  had  resided  ever 
since  their  founder,  the  great-grandson  of  the 
Prophet,  had  settled  there,  an  exile  from  the  East. 

Leaving  Fez  in  the  summer,  the  Sultan  pro- 
ceeded south,  crossing  the  Atlas  above  Kasba-el- 
Maghzen,  and  descended  to  the  upper  waters  of 
the  Wad  Ziz.  An  expedition  such  as  this  would 
have  required  a  system  of  organisation  far  in 
excess  of  the  capabilities  of  the  Moors,  great 
though  their  resources  were.  Food  was  lacking ; 
the  desert  regions  could  provide  little.  The  water 
was  bad,  the  heat  very  great.  Every  kind  of  delay, 
including  rebellion  and  the  consequent  punish- 
ment of  the  tribes,  hampered  the  Sultan's  move- 
ments ;  and  it  was  only  toward  winter  that  he 
arrived  in  Tafilet  with  a  fever-stricken  army  and 
greatly  diminished  transport. 


{Photo  by  Author, 


MOUNTAIN    TOPS,    ATLAS. 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  11 

Mulai  Hassen  returned  from  Tafilet  a  dying 
man.  The  internal  complaint  from  which  he  was 
suffering  had  become  acute  from  the  hardships  he 
had  undergone,  and  he  was  unable  to  obtain  the 
rest  that  his  state  of  health  required,  nor  would 
he  place  himself  under  a  regime.  For  a  few 
months  he  remained  in  the  southern  capital,  and 
in  the  late  spring  1894  set  out  to  suppress  a 
rebellion  that  had  broken  out  in  the  Tadla  region. 

While  camping  in  the  enemy  country  he  died. 
Now,  the  death  of  the  Sultan  under  such  circum- 
stances was  fraught  with  danger  to  the  State.  He 
was  an  absolute  monarch,  and  with  his  disappear- 
ance all  authority  and  government  lapsed  until 
his  successor  should  have  taken  up  the  reins. 
Again,  the  expedition  was  in  hostile  country,  and 
any  inkling  of  the  Sultan's  death  would  have 
brought  the  tribes  down  to  pillage  and  loot  the 
Imperial  camp.  As  long  as  the  Sultan  lived,  and\ 
was  present  with  his  expedition,  his  prestige  was 
sufficient  to  prevent  an  attack  of  the  tribes — 
though  even  this  was  not  unknown  on  one  or  two 
occasions — and  to  hold  his  forces  together  as  a 
sort  of  concrete  body.  But  his  death,  if  known, 
would  have  meant  speedy  disorganisation,  nor 
could  the  troops  themselves  be  trusted  not  to 
seize  this  opportunity  to  murder  and  loot. 

It  was  therefore  necessary  that  the  Sultan's 
demise  should  be  kept  an  absolute  secret.  He 
had  died  in  the  recesses  of  his  tents,  themselves 
enclosed  in  a  great  canvas  wall,  inside  which, 
except  on  very  special  occasions,  no  one  was 


12  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

permitted  to  penetrate.  The  knowledge  of  his 
death  was  therefore  limited  to  the  personal  slaves 
and  to  his  Chamberlain,  Bou  Ahmed. 

Orders  were  given  that  the  Sultan  would  start 
on  his  journey  at  dawn,  and  before  daylight  the 
State  palanquin  was  carried  into  the  Imperial 
enclosure,  the  corpse  laid  within  it,  and  its  doors 
closed  and  the  curtains  drawn.  At  the  first  pale 
break  of  dawn  the  palanquin  was  brought  out, 
supported  by  sturdy  mules.  Bugles  were  blown, 
the  band  played,  and  the  bowing  courtiers  and 
officials  poured  forth  their  stentorian  cry,  "  May 
God  protect  the  life  of  our  Lord."  The  procession 
formed  up,  and,  led  by  flying  banners,  the  dead 
Sultan  set  out  on  his  march. 

A  great  distance  was  covered  that  day.  Only 
once  did  the  procession  stop,  when  the  palanquin 
was  carried  into  a  tent  by  the  roadside,  that  the 
Sultan  might  breakfast.  Food  was  borne  in  and 
out ;  tea,  with  all  the  paraphernalia  of  its  brew- 
ing, was  served :  but  none  but  the  slaves  who  knew 
the  secret  were  permitted  to  enter.  The  Chamber- 
lain remained  with  the  corpse,  and  when  a  certain 
time  had  passed,  he  emerged  to  state  that  His 
Majesty  was  rested  and  had  breakfasted,  and 
would  proceed  on  his  journey — and  once  more 
the  procession  moved  on.  Another  long  march 
was  made  to  where  the  great  camp  was  pitched 
for  the  night. 

The  Sultan  was  tired,  the  Chamberlain  said. 
He  would  not  come  out  of  his  enclosure  to  trans- 
act business  as  usual  in  the  "  Diwan  "  tent,  where 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  13 

he  granted  audiences.  Documents  were  taken  in 
to  the  royal  quarters  by  the  Chamberlain  himself, 
and,  when  necessary,  they  emerged  bearing  the 
seal  of  State,  and  verbal  replies  were  given  to  a 
host  of  questions. 

Then  another  day  of  forced  marches,  for  the 
expedition  was  still  in  dangerous  country ;  but 
Mulai  Hassen's  death  could  no  longer  be  con- 
cealed. It  was  summer,  and  the  state  of  the 
Sultan's  body  told  its  own  secret. 

Bou  Ahmed  announced  that  His  Majesty  had 
died  two  days  before,  and  that  by  this  time  his 
young  son,  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz,  chosen  and  nomi- 
nated by  his  father,  had  been  proclaimed  at  Rabat, 
whither  the  fleetest  of  runners  had  been  sent  with 
the  news  immediately  after  the  death  had  occurred. 

It  was  a  fait  accompli.  The  army  was  now  free 
of  the  danger  of  being  attacked  by  the  tribes  ; 
and  the  knowledge  that  the  new  Sultan  was  already 
reigning,  and  that  tranquillity  existed  elsewhere, 
deterred  the  troops  from  any  excesses.  Many 
took  the  occasion  of  a  certain  disorganisation  to 
desert,  but  so  customary  was  this  practice  that  it 
attracted  little  or  no  attention. 

Two  days  later  the  body  of  the  dead  Sultan,  - 
now  in  a  terrible  state  of  decomposition,  arrived 
at  Rabat.  It  must  have  been  a  gruesome  pro- 
cession from  the  description  his  son  Mulai  Abdul 
Aziz  gave  me  :  the  hurried  arrival  of  the  swaying 
palanquin  bearing  its  terrible  burden,  five  days 
dead  in  the  great  heat  of  summer ;  the  escort, 
who  had  bound  scarves  over  their  faces — but  even 


16  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

dishes  of  cooked  meats,  or  what  was  left  of  them, 
had  been  removed,  there  remained  great  plates  of 
fresh  butter,  the  very  first  of  the  season,  hard 
and  rolled  into  large  balls.  The  learned  tutor  of 
the  Sultan's  sons  stated  that  it  was  much  to  be 
regretted  that  such  splendid  butter  should  be 
wasted  by  being  eaten  by  the  palace  slaves  and 
attendants,  and  forthwith  he  tore  off  a  length  of 
his  fine  white  turban,  rolled  up  one  of  the  large 
balls  of  butter,  and  replaced  the  package  in  the 
crown  of  his  high-peaked  fez,  which  formed  the 
foundation  of  his  headgear. 

One  of  the  slaves  told  Mulai  Hassen  what  had 
occurred,  and  he  determined  to  amuse  himself  at 
the  expense  of  his  sons'  tutor.  He  entered  the 
great  chamber  where  the  guests  were  assembled 
and  bade  them  welcome,  paying  a  few  compli- 
ments to  each.  When  it  came  to  the  turn  of  the 
learned  man,  the  Sultan  congratulated  him  on 
his  great  attainments,  adding,  "  He  shall  be  speci- 
ally honoured.  Bring  rose-water  and  incense." 

Now,  it  is  the  custom  at  Moorish  feasts  to 
sprinkle  the  guests  with  rose  and  orange-blossom 
water,  and  to  perfume  their  robes  with  incense. 
So  the  long-necked  silver  bottles  and  the  brass 
incense-burner  were  produced.  From  the  latter, 
laid  upon  red-hot  charcoal,  the  burning  sandal- 
wood  diffused  its  smoke  in  delicious  clouds. 
Having  received  the  regulation  sprinkling,  the 
incense-burner  was  placed  before  him.  Lifting 
his  wide  sleeves,  the  slaves  held  the  censer  below 
them,  allowing  the  smoke  to  permeate  his  volum- 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  17 

inous  garments.  Then  drawing  the  hood  of  his 
"  bernous  "  over  his  head  and  face,  the  customary 
perfuming  of  the  turban  was  begun.  But  the 
slaves  held  tight,  and  instead  of  the  performance 
lasting  half  a  minute,  it  was  unduly  prolonged. 
At  first  it  was  only  the  richly-perfumed  smoke  of 
the  sandalwood  that  entered  his  nose  and  eyes  ; 
but  presently  the  delicious  odour  changed,  for  the 
butter  concealed  in  his  fez,  melting  under  the 
applied  heat  of  the  red-hot  charcoal,  was  begin- 
ning to  drop  into  the  incense-burner,  giving  forth 
a  penetrating  and  unpleasant  odour  of  cooking. 
From  drops  to  a  trickling  stream  took  a  very 
little  while,  and  soon  the  whole  room  was  full  of 
the  smoke  of  burning  butter,  while  the  aged  scholar 
presented  the  most  pitiful  sight — half -blinded, 
choking,  and  dripping  all  over.  When  he  had 
been  washed  and  cleaned  up  the  Sultan  had 
gone. 

Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  was,  at  the  time  of  his  suc- 
cession (1894),  about  twelve  or  thirteen  years  of 
age.  He  was  a  younger  son  of  the  late  Sultan, 
for  Islamic  thrones  do  not  necessarily  descend  by 
primogeniture.  It  is  not  unseldom  a  brother  who 
succeeds,  and  at  times  even  more  distant  relations. 
The  throne  is  almost  elective  inside  the  royal 
family,  though,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  a  Sultan 
generally  nominates  his  successor.  The  descent 
from  the  common  ancestor — who  in  this  case  of 
Shereefian  families  is  the  Prophet  Mohammed — 
is  of  far  greater  importance  than  the  relationship 
of  the  deceased  and  succeeding  Sultan.  After  the 

B 


18  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

abdication  of  Mulai  Hafid  in  1912,  his  half-brother, 
Mulai  Youssef,  was  "chosen"  to  fill  the  throne, 
and  accepted  without  hesitation.  His  choice  has 
been  amply  justified  by  the  dignified  manner  and 
the  constant  tact  that  he  has  always  shown  in 
his  very  difficult  position. 

The  mother  of  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  was  a  Turkish 
lady,  brought  from  Constantinople  to  Morocco. 
Report  states  that  she  was  a  woman  of  great 
intelligence  and  considerable  force  of  character. 
She  was  certainly  a  most  devoted  mother.  It  is 
even  said  that  she  played  a  part  in  the  politics 
of  the  country,  and  that  she  was  consulted  on 
affairs  of  State  by  her  husband.  That  she  must 
have  possessed  a  remarkable  personality  is  clear 
from  the  fact  that  she  maintained  her  influence 
over  the  Sultan  till  the  day  of  his  death — no  easy 
task  amidst  a  host  of  rivals — and  so  assured  the 
succession  of  her  son.  Her  great  friend  and  com- 
panion in  the  harem  was  another  Turkish  lady,, 
the  mother  of  the  reigning  Sultan  Mulai  Youssef. 
It  is  curious  that  these  two  "  strangers  in  a  foreign 
land  "  should  both  have  been  destined  to  become 
the  mothers  of  Sultans. 

It  was  only  natural  that  the  succession  of  a 
minor  gave  rise  to  every  form  of  intrigue  at  Court. 
There  were  two  great  factions  in  the  palace — the 
party  of  Bou  Ahmed,  the  powerful  Chamberlain, 
on  the  one  hand,  and  that  of  the  Grand  Vizier 
and  Minister  of  War  on  the  other.  These  two  high 
officials  belonged  to  the  aristocratic  and  powerful 
family  of  the  Ulad  Jamai,  and  were  respectively 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  19 

Haj  Amaati  and  Si  Mohammed  Soreir.  Now  Bou 
Ahmed  was  the  son  of  a  negro  slave,  and  there- 
fore could  count  on  no  tribal  or  family  influence. 
His  rivals,  on  the  contrary,  were  Fez  aristocrats, 
highly  born,  and  supported  by  the  influential 
population  of  the  towns.  They  came  of  what  is 
known  as  a  "  Maghzen  "  family — that  is  to  say, 
a  family  who  in  the  past  had  held  Government 
posts,  and  had  a  sort  of  traditional  claim  to  high 
employment.  It  was  evident  that  jealousy  must 
exist  between  these  two  factions. 

Bou  Ahmed's  position  of  Chamberlain  gave  him 
constant  access  to  his  sovereign,  whose  extreme 
youth  brought  him  little  into  contact  with  his 
viziers.  No  doubt,  too,  Bou  Ahmed  could  count 
upon  the  influence  of  the  Sultan's  mother.  He 
had  been  the  constant  and  trustworthy  confidant 
of  her  husband,  and  instrumental  in  putting  her 
son  on  the  throne.  His  own  fate,  too,  depended 
upon  his  keeping  him  there,  and  there  can  be 
little  doubt  that  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz's  mother  and 
Bou  Ahmed  worked  in  connivance. 

As  soon  as  the  new  Government  was  organised 
sufficiently  for  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  to  travel,  the 
Court  left  Rabat  for  Fez — the  real  capital  of  the 
country.  No  Sultan  can  count  upon  his  throne 
as  being  safe  until  he  has  been  accepted  by  the 
religious  and  aristocratic  Fezzis,  and  taken  up  his 
residence  in  the  city;  for  Fez  is  the  centre  of 
religion  and  learning — and  also  of  intrigue — and 
the  influence  of  its  population  upon  the  tribes  is 
very  great.  It  was  therefore  very  important  that 


18  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

abdication  of  Mulai  Hafid  in  1912,  his  half-brother, 
Mulai  Youssef,  was  "chosen"  to  fill  the  throne, 
and  accepted  without  hesitation.  His  choice  has 
been  amply  justified  by  the  dignified  manner  and 
the  constant  tact  that  he  has  always  shown  in 
his  very  difficult  position. 

The  mother  of  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  was  a  Turkish 
lady,  brought  from  Constantinople  to  Morocco. 
Report  states  that  she  was  a  woman  of  great 
intelligence  and  considerable  force  of  character. 
She  was  certainly  a  most  devoted  mother.  It  is 
even  said  that  she  played  a  part  in  the  politics 
of  the  country,  and  that  she  was  consulted  on 
affairs  of  State  by  her  husband.  That  she  must 
have  possessed  a  remarkable  personality  is  clear 
from  the  fact  that  she  maintained  her  influence 
over  the  Sultan  till  the  day  of  his  death — no  easy 
task  amidst  a  host  of  rivals — and  so  assured  the 
succession  of  her  son.  Her  great  friend  and  com- 
panion in  the  harem  was  another  Turkish  lady,, 
the  mother  of  the  reigning  Sultan  Mulai  Youssef. 
It  is  curious  that  these  two  "  strangers  in  a  foreign 
land  "  should  both  have  been  destined  to  become 
the  mothers  of  Sultans. 

It  was  only  natural  that  the  succession  of  a 
minor  gave  rise  to  every  form  of  intrigue  at  Court. 
There  were  two  great  factions  in  the  palace — the 
party  of  Bou  Ahmed,  the  powerful  Chamberlain, 
on  the  one  hand,  and  that  of  the  Grand  Vizier 
and  Minister  of-  War  on  the  other.  These  two  high 
officials  belonged  to  the  aristocratic  and  powerful 
family  of  the  Ulad  Jamai,  and  were  respectively 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  19 

Haj  Amaati  and  Si  Mohammed  Soreir.  Now  Bou 
Ahmed  was  the  son  of  a  negro  slave,  and  there- 
fore could  count  on  no  tribal  or  family  influence. 
His  rivals,  on  the  contrary,  were  Fez  aristocrats, 
highly  born,  and  supported  by  the  influential 
population  of  the  towns.  They  came  of  what  is 
known  as  a  "  Maghzen  "  family — that  is  to  say, 
a  family  who  in  the  past  had  held  Government 
posts,  and  had  a  sort  of  traditional  claim  to  high 
employment.  It  was  evident  that  jealousy  must 
exist  between  these  two  factions. 

Bou  Ahmed's  position  of  Chamberlain  gave  him 
constant  access  to  his  sovereign,  whose  extreme 
youth  brought  him  little  into  contact  with  his 
viziers.  No  doubt,  too,  Bou  Ahmed  could  count 
upon  the  influence  of  the  Sultan's  mother.  He 
had  been  the  constant  and  trustworthy  confidant 
of  her  husband,  and  instrumental  in  putting  her 
son  on  the  throne.  His  own  fate,  too,  depended 
upon  his  keeping  him  there,  and  there  can  be 
little  doubt  that  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz's  mother  and 
Bou  Ahmed  worked  in  connivance. 

As  soon  as  the  new  Government  was  organised 
sufficiently  for  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  to  travel,  the 
Court  left  Rabat  for  Fez — the  real  capital  of  the 
country.  No  Sultan  can  count  upon  his  throne 
as  being  safe  until  he  has  been  accepted  by  the 
religious  and  aristocratic  Fezzis,  and  taken  up  his 
residence  in  the  city;  for  Fez  is  the  centre  of 
religion  and  learning — and  also  of  intrigue — and 
the  influence  of  its  population  upon  the  tribes  is 
very  great.  It  was  therefore  very  important  that 


20  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

the  young  Sultan  should  reach  Fez  at  as  early 
a  date  as  possible.  His  journey  through  the  tribes 
to  Meknes  was  very  successful.  He  was  well 
received  on  every  side,  and  on  his  arrival  at  the 
old  capital  which  Mulai  Ismail,  a  contemporary 
of  Louis  Quatorze,  had  built,  the  population  of 
the  city  accorded  him  a  popular  welcome. 

Meknes  is  some  thirty-three  miles  from  Fez, 
and  there  remained  only  this  last  stage  of  the 
journey  to  be  accomplished. 

Bou  Ahmed  fully  appreciated  his  position.  He 
knew  that  once  in  Fez  his  influence  must  decrease. 
His  rivals  could  count  upon  the  support  not  only 
of  the  townspeople,  but  also  of  the  Sultan's  rela- 
tions in  the  capital.  To  the  Fezzis  he  was  an 
upstart,  and  there  would  be  no  peace  from  their 
intrigues  to  bring  about  his  fall,  and  no  pity  when 
he  fell.  It  was  a  case  of  now  or  never  for  Bou 
Ahmed. 

There  were  no  signs  of  the  coming  storm.  The 
Ulad  Jamai  brothers  were  no  doubt  waiting  till 
their  arrival  amongst  their  own  people  in  Fez  to 
begin  a  more  active  intrigue,  and  Bou  Ahmed 
himself  was  courteous  and  a  little  obsequious  to 
the  influential  viziers.  A  few  mornings  after  the 
Sultan's  arrival  at  Meknes,  the  usual  morning 
Court  was  being  held.  Haj  Amaati,  the  Grand 
Vizier,  surrounded  by  his  white-robed  followers, 
rode  into  the  palace  square,  amidst  the  bowing 
officials  and  the  salutes  of  troops.  He  was  imme- 
diately summoned  into  the  Sultan's  presence. 

Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  was  alone  with  Bou  Ahmed 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  21 

when  Haj  Amaati  entered.  He  prostrated  him- 
self, and  waited  for  the  Sultan  to  speak.  In  a 
rather  frightened  voice  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  asked 
him  a  question.  Haj  Amaati' s  answer  was  not 
found  satisfactory,  and  Bou  Ahmed  burst  forth 
in  a  string  of  reproaches  against  the  Vizier,  and 
accused  him  of  disloyalty,  avarice,  extortion,  and 
political  crimes.  Suddenly  appealing  to  the  Sul- 
tan, he  asked  for  permission  to  arrest  him.  Mulai 
Abdul  Aziz  inclined  his  head. 

A  few  minutes  later  a  dishevelled,  cringing, 
crying  creature,  amid  jeers  and  laughter,  was 
dragged  through  the  palace  square  amongst  the 
crowd  that  only  so  short  a  time  before  had  been 
bowing  to  the  ground.  His  clothes  were  torn, 
for  the  soldiers  were  rough,  and  his  turban  was 
all  askew.  As  he  passed  through  the  gate,  dragged 
by  the  soldiery,  the  sentry  at  the  door  seized 
the  Vizier's  clean  white  turban  and  set  it  on  his 
own  head,  replacing  it  by  his  own  duty  fez  cap. 
A  shout  of  laughter  greeted  this  act. 

The  Vizier's  brother,  Si  Mohammed  Soreir,  the 
Minister  of  War,  had  not  yet  left  his  house  for 
the  palace.  He  was  arrested  at  his  own  doorway, 
and  did  not  attempt  to  resist,  but  allowed  himself 
to  be  led  to  prison. 

The  subsequent  history  of  these  two  men  forms 
perhaps  the  blackest  page  of  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz's 
reign.  They  were  sent  in  fetters  to  Tetuan,  and 
confined,  chained  and  fettered,  in  a  dungeon.  In 
the  course  of  time — and  how  long  those  ten  years 
must  have  been — Haj  Amaati  died.  The  Governor 


22  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

of  Tetuan  was  afraid  to  bury  the  body,  lest  he 
should  be  accused  of  having  allowed  his  prisoner 
to  escape.  He  wrote  to  Court  for  instructions. 
It  was  summer,  and  even  the  dungeon  was  hot. 
The  answer  did  not  come  for  eleven  days,  and  all 
that  time  Si  Mohammed  Soreir  remained  chained 
to  his  brother's  corpse  !  The  brother  survived. 
In  1908  he  was  released  after  fourteen  years' 
incarceration,  a  hopeless,  broken,  ruined  man. 
Everything  he  had  possessed  had  been  confis- 
cated ;  his  wives  and  children  had  died,  the  result 
of  want  and  persecution.  He  emerged  from  his 
dark  dungeon  nearly  blind,  and  lame  from  the 
cruel  fetters  he  had  worn.  In  his  days  of  power 
he  had  been  cruel,  it  is  said — but  what  a  price  he 
paid ! 

He  settled  in  Tangier,  where  I  saw  him  almost 
daily.  He  was  in  absolute  poverty ;  but  all  his 
friends  assisted  him — and  he  wanted  so  little.  An 
old  slave  woman  of  the  family,  who  had  survived 
in  some  out-of-the-way  corner,  came  to  look  after 
him,  and  used  to  massage  his  tortured  wrists  and 
ankles.  At  length  he  died. 

Two  days  before  his  death  I  saw  him  for  the 
last  time.  It  was  clear  that  a  very  little  span 
of  life  remained  for  him.  I  sat  with  him  a  long 
time,  and  as  I  rose  to  leave  him,  he  said  :  "  Listen. 
When  they  have  washed  my  body  for  burial,  I 
want  you  to  see  that  my  chains  and  fetters  are 
put  back  upon  my  limbs.  I  desire  to  appear 
before  my  God  as  I  spent  those  fourteen  years 
of  my  life,  that  I  may  appeal  to  Him  for  the 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  23 

justice  my  Sultan  refused  me,  that  He  in  His 
great  mercy  and  forgiveness  may  open  to  me  the 
gates  of  Paradise." 

It  was  impossible  to  replace  the  chains  and 
fetters,  but  I  believe  a  link  was  sewn  up  in  his 
winding-sheet.  With  the  cruellest  cynicism  he  was 
given  an  official  military  funeral,  attended  by  all 
the  native  authorities  and  functionaries — f or  after 
all  he  had  been  Minister  of  War  ! 

Sir  Ernest  Satow  represented  Great  Britain  in 
Morocco  at  the  time  of  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz's  succes- 
sion. On  learning  of  Mulai  Hassen's  death,  the 
news  of  which  Kaid  Maclean — who  was  with  the 
Moorish  army — had  managed  to  send  to  Tangier 
with  almost  incredible  rapidity,  Sir  Ernest  sent 
for  me  and  told  me  that  he  proposed  to  send 
some  confidential  agent  to  Fez  upon  a  mission, 
which  would  certainly  be  difficult  and  very  likely 
dangerous,  for,  as  the  news  of  the  Sultan's  death 
spread,  there  would  no  doubt  be  disturbances  on 
every  side.  I  naturally  volunteered  to  go,  and 
my  offer  was  accepted.  The  same  night  at  twelve 
o'clock  I  left,  accompanied  by  one  of  my  men, 
both  of  us  well  mounted  and  armed.  I  am  averse 
to  carrying  arms  in  such  countries  as  Morocco, 
and  have  very  seldom  done  so ;  but  the  occasion 
was  unusual,  and  bands  of  marauders  might  be 
looked  for.  I  was  dressed  as  a  native  mountaineer, 
my  head  shaved  except  for  one  long  lock  of  hair, 
which  I,  native  fashion,  wore  at  this  period  of 
my  life ;  my  legs  bare,  and  my  feet  thrust  into 
yellow  slippers.  A  rough  brown-hooded  cloak 


24  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

covered  my  scanty  clothing.  I,  no  doubt,  looked 
a  brigand — my  companion  was  one.  Luckily  I 
had  good  horses  in  my  stable,  and  we  chose  the 
two  most  likely  to  stand  the  fatigue.  It  was  most 
important  to  start  at  once  and  travel  fast,  in 
order,  if  possible,  to  keep  ahead  of  the  news  of 
the  Sultan's  death,  which  was  now  publicly  known 
in  Tangier.  I  could  not  take  the  direct  route  for 
Fez,  for  part  of  my  mission  was  to  visit  certain 
influential  Shereefs  en  route  to  whom  I  was  per- 
sonally known,  and  to  exhort  them  to  use  all 
their  influence  in  the  interests  of  peace,  law,  and 
order. 

It  was  midsummer,  and  dawn  was  early ;  but 
before  the  sun  had  risen  we  reached  Arzeila, 
twenty-six  miles  from  Tangier.  Here  I  break- 
fasted with  the  Shereef  of  Abrish,  a  brother-in- 
law  of  the  famous  Raisuli,  and  himself  a  man  of 
considerable  renown.  He  promised  to  exert  all 
his  influence  to  keep  the  tribes  quiet.  After  a 
short  halt  I  left  the  town,  and  at  night  arrived 
at  Alcazar,  having  covered,  by  the  route  we  had 
travelled,  well  over  sixty  miles.  From  Alcazar  to 
Wazzan  was  a  matter  of  some  eight  hours'  ride, 
and  I  reached  the  holy  city  of  that  name  early 
the  next  afternoon.  I  was  most  cordially  received 
by  the  very  influential  Shereefs  who  inhabit  that 
little  mountain  city,  so  rarely  visited  by  Euro- 
peans, as  it  is  holy  ground.  It  was  a  feast-day ; 
but  in  spite  of  that  the  Shereefs  at  once  got  to 
work,  sending  numerous  letters  to  the  tribes  to 
remain  quiet.  This  work  kept  me  at  Wazzan  till 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  25 

the  middle  of  the  following  day,  when  I  started 
once  more,  reaching  the  Maizerieh,  a  village  on 
the  hills  above  the  Sebou  Valley,  that  night. 
Here  we  slept,  to  start  again  before  daylight. 

It  was  clear  that  the  tribes  here  had  learned 
the  news  of  the  Sultan's  death,  for  all  night  long 
there  was  desultory  firing,  and  in  the  early  dawn 
we  could  distinguish  groups  of  horsemen  in  the 
valley  below.  A  general  wiping  out  of  old  scores 
had  begun,  combined  with  organised  pillage. 

Avoiding  as  far  as  possible  the  districts  where 
firing  was  taking  place,  my  man  and  I  rode  on. 
The  situation  was  uncomfortable,  and  I  forgot 
for  a  moment  what  brigands  we  ourselves  must 
have  looked ;  but  on  suddenly  coming  upon  a 
long  line  of  laden  camels,  the  half-dozen  caravan 
men  in  charge  took  to  their  heels  and  ran  for 
their  lives.  We  soon,  however,  reassured  them, 
and  rode  on.  The  fourth  day's  travelling  after 
leaving  Tangier  I  arrived  in  Fez,  having  by  our 
detours  covered  from  190  to  200  miles.  My  horses 
were  tired,  but  not  done  up.  At  midday  I  pre- 
sented the  British  Minister's  despatch,  and  my 
verbal  message,  to  a  council  of  the  native  authori- 
ties sitting  in  the  house  of  Amin  Haj  Abdesalam 
El-Mokri,  the  father  of  the  well-known  Grand 
Vizier,  Haj  Mohammed  El-Mokri,  perhaps  the 
most  intelligent  and  capable  of  all  the  Moorish 
authorities  of  to-day. 

I  remained  in  Fez  for  several  weeks.  Mean- 
while, Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  had  reached  Meknes, 
where,  at  the  moment  of  the  arrest  of  the  Grand 


26  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

Vizier  and  the  Minister  of  War,  I  arrived,  return- 
ing to  Fez  with  the  young  Sultan. 

I  have  always  looked  back  upon  that  period 
with  great  pleasure.  I  was  engaged  upon  a  mission 
of  some  delicacy,  and  I  was  thrust  into  the  very 
midst  of  native  affairs.  With  that  hospitality  for 
which  the  Mokri  family  is  so  well  known,  I  was 
a  guest  in  their  great  house,  one  of  the  sights  of 
Fez,  with  its  terraced  gardens  and  its  many  foun- 
tains. It  required  no  little  courage  in  those  days 
to  harbour  a  "  Christian,"  and  I  think  this  was 
the  first  time  on  which  a  European  had  ever 
been  made  welcome  to  stay  in  one  of  the  great 
Fez  houses.  I  wore  the  native  dress — I  had,  of 
course,  arrived  without  even  a  change  of  shirt — 
and  lived  in  the  company  of  the  sons  of  the  family, 
and  was  treated  as  one  of  them.  My  wants  were 
amply  supplied  from  the  voluminous  wardrobes  of 
my  hosts. 

My  mission  was  a  success.  On  14th  July  Sir 
Ernest  Satow  wrote  me  agreeing  to  my  request 
to  be  allowed  to  return  to  Tangier.  His  letter  is 
before  me  now  : — 

"  The  Foreign  Office  has  much  approved  of  my 
having  sent  you  to  Fez,  and  will  not  be  unmindful 
of  the  services  you  have  rendered  on  the  present 
occasion.  I  sent  copies  of  the  greater  part  of 
your  long  report  (which  I  copied  out  myself)  to 
Sanderson,  and  Lord  Kimberley  read  it  with  great 
interest.  I  will  only  add  now  that  I  feel  myself 
under  a  great  obligation  to  you  for  having  under- 
taken an  important  and,  to  all  appearances,  peril- 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  27 

ous  mission.  But  I  felt  you  were  the  man  to 
accomplish  it.  ...  Many  thanks  for  all  you  have 
done.  It  has  been  most  successful." 

My  mission  had  lasted  many  weeks,  and  necessi- 
tated riding  several  hundreds  of  miles  in  the  great 
heat  of  midsummer  in  discomfort,  and  often  in 
danger.  The  British  Government  remunerated  my 
services  by  presenting  me  with  a  cheque  of  £100. 
I  did  not  complain,  nor  do  I  now,  for  it  has  been 
so  unusual  to  be  paid  at  all  when  employed  upon 
these  unofficial  missions,  that  it  seemed  almost 
extravagant.  Only  on  one  other  occasion  during 
my  whole  Morocco  career  have  I  ever  been  paid 
even  my  out-of-pocket  expenses  for  tasks  under- 
taken at  the  request  of  the  British  authorities. 
I  never  realised  myself  the  extent  of  the  work 
I  have  done  in  this  connection  until  I  began  to 
write  this  book,  when  I  unearthed  the  voluminous 
correspondence  that  a  succession  of  British  Minis- 
ters had  addressed  to  me,  and  which  seem  to 
treat  of  every  mortal  question  pertaining  to 
Morocco. 

I  have  quoted  Sir  Ernest  Satow's  letter,  not 
from  any  desire  to  boast  of  the  utility  of  my 
work,  but  because  it  represented  one  of  the  very 
few  marks  of  appreciation  and  encouragement  that 
I  ever  received  from  official  sources,  or,  rather,  I 
should  perhaps  say,  in  which  the  credit  of  my 
work  was  allowed  to  me.  It  was  only  years  later 
that  I  learned  that  from  the  day  of  Sir  Ernest 
Satow's  departure  from  Morocco,  over  a  period 
of  many  years,  all  my  work  went  home  anony- 


28  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

mously — that  is  to  say,  contained  in  official  de- 
spatch as  "  I  understand,"  or  "  I  am  informed." 
In  my  own  particular  case  it  didn't  matter  much ; 
but  I  confess  that  it  hurt  a  little  to  be  told  long 
afterwards  that  the  mass  of  information  that  I 
obtained — often  by  undertaking  journeys  at  the 
direct  instigation  of  the  British  authorities,  often 
by  my  own  personal  relations  with  the  tribes,  and 
always  at  my  own  expense — went  home  without 
its  origin  being  disclosed,  and  without  identity. 
I  have  quoted  Sir  Ernest  Satow's  letter ;  I  will 
give  one  or  two  quotations  from  those  of  his 
successors. 

"  I  want  you  particularly  to  find  out  and  let 
me  know  the  following  things  .  .  ."  "It  would 
be  interesting,  as  you  are  in  that  part  of  the 
country,  if  you  would  go  a  little  farther  and 
visit  ..."  "I  want  you  to  impress  upon  the 
Sultan  the  importance  of  .  .  ."  "  I  would  like 
you  to  return  here  as  soon  as  possible,  to  consult 
you  about  the  .  .  .  question."  "  You  are  the 
only  authority  on  the  .  .  .  tribes  and  what  is 
passing  there.  Could  you  therefore  return  .  .  ." 
"  I  hope  you  will  arrange  not  to  be  long  away, 
as  I  want  to  consult  you  about  ..."  "  Please 
give  the  Sultan  clearly  to  understand  that  we  will 
not  .  .  ."  "  You  are  the  one  and  only  authority 
on  these  questions."  "When  you  have  time 
would  you  make  me  a  full  report  on  ..."  "As 
a  private  individual  it  will  be  easier  for  you  to 
get  the  Maghzen  [Government]  to  agree  to  .  .  ." 
"  I  bow  to  your  superior  knowledge  on  all  these 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  29 

questions,  and  now  agree  with  you  that  ..." 
"  Do  come  back.  I  am  lost  without  having  you 
to  consult."  These  are  a  few  extracts  of  what 
was  written  ;  the  verbal  instructions  and  requests 
were  naturally  far  greater. 

I  am  glad  of  having  been  able  to  be  of  use, 
and  would  not  hesitate  to  act  again  as  I  acted 
in  the  past ;  but  the  policy  of  depriving  the 
unofficial  and  unpaid  workman  of  the  little  crumbs 
of  credit  is  wrong.  It  ought  rather  to  be  the  rule 
to  tempt  young  men  of  adventurous  disposition 
to  live  the  life  I  led,  and,  if  necessary,  to  assist 
them — not  to  use  them  perpetually  and  keep  them 
outside  the  pale.  It  is  contrary  to  human  nature 
to  be  absolutely  disinterested  in  the  personal  suc- 
cess of  one's  work,  and  the  suppression  of  its 
origin — more  particularly  when  its  origin  is  a  life- 
time of  travel  and  of  study,  as  well  as  a  proficiency 
for  making  friends  amongst  such  people  as  the 
Moors — can  only  tend  toward  discouragement.  In 
any  branch  of  life  but  that  of  diplomacy  such 
action  would  be  considered  incorrect. 

Since  1912,  when  the  French  Protectorate  was 
declared,  and  even  before  that  date,  from  the 
time  when  England  had  abandoned  all  political 
aims  in  Morocco  except  to  assist  French  policy, 
my  information  became  of  more  value  to  the 
authorities  of  our  friend  and  ally  than  to  our- 
selves. I  was  invited  to  accompany  more  than 
one  French  special  Mission,  and  have  on  many 
occasions  been  consulted  on  questions  of  great 
confidence,  not  only  by  French  Ministers  in  Tan- 


30  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

gier,  but  also  by  the  highest  authorities  of  the 
French  Protectorate.  My  little  dossier  of  French 
official  correspondence  compares  very  favourably 
with  that  of  our  own  people.  Sir  Ernest  Satow's 
letter,  which  was  quoted,  is  the  one  and  only 
expression  of  appreciation  I  ever  received  from 
the  British  Government,  while  I  have  a  dozen 
letters  of  thanks,  simple  and  full  of  appreciation 
and  encouragement,  from  Paris.  My  duties  as 
'  Times  '  correspondent  often  brought  me  into  more 
or  less  acute  discussions  with  the  Spanish  Govern- 
ment, but  this  has  not  deterred  their  high  authori- 
ties from  expressing  to  me  on  several  occasions, 
in  letters  which  I  much  appreciate,  their  thanks 
for  information  given,  and  their  satisfaction  at  the 
large  and  fair  way  I  have  treated  certain  diplo- 
matic questions,  not  only  in  the  '  Times '  but  also 
elsewhere. 

In  such  a  life  as  I  have  led  there  have  been 
necessarily  moments  when  one  has  been  disheart- 
ened and  depressed,  perhaps  owing  to  fever,  per- 
haps to  events.  In  my  case,  happily,  they  have 
been  few  and  far  between,  and  I  look  back  over 
those  past  years  in  Morocco  as  a  period  of  great 
pleasure ;  but  there  have  been  moments  when  a 
little  word  of  encouragement,  a  few  lines  to  say 
that  one's  work  had  been  appreciated  at  home — 
another  letter,  for  instance,  like  Sir  Ernest  Satow's 
— would  have  been  so  welcome  and  have  done  so 
much.  I  can  honestly  say  the  occasions  have  not 
been  wanting. 

I  have  enjoyed  throughout  the  confidence  of 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  31 

our  representatives,  and  a  very  intimate  and  much 
appreciated  friendship  with  them  all.  I  have  had 
every  opportunity  of  seeing  the  inner  workings  of 
their  diplomacy,  and  I  can  state  that  Great 
Britain  has  been  fortunate  in  her  Ministers  in 
this  country.  Some  left  Tangier  to  fill  more 
important  posts  elsewhere — Sir  Ernest  Satow,  Sir 
Arthur  Nicolson,  and  the  late  Sir  Gerard  Lowther, 
the  best  and  kindest  of  men.  One,  perhaps  the 
most  brilliant  of  all,  rests  here  for  ever,  the  last 
British  Minister  to  Morocco,  Sir  Reginald  Lister, 
whose  loss  to  his  country  was  so  great,  and  to 
his  friends  irreparable. 


II. 

LIFE  AT   THE   MOORISH  COURT. 

MULAI  ABDUL  Aziz's  stay  in  Fez,  the  northern 
capital,  in  1894,  was  not  of  long  duration,  for  it 
was  important  that  the  Court  should  move  to  the 
south  to  consolidate  his  throne  in  those  regions. 
While  Northern  Morocco  has  always  been  the  un- 
restful  and  most  seditious  part  of  the  country,  it 
has  never  presented  such  a  serious  danger  as  the 
south  is  capable  of  becoming,  for  the  northern 
tribes  are  poor,  numerically  in  no  great  force,  and 
always  at  war  with  each  other.  But  in  the  Marra- 
kesh  region  it  is  different.  The  rich  agricultural 
land,  and  the  great  harvest  reaped  from  it,  render 
the  tribes  affluent ;  they  are  well  horsed  and  well 
armed,  and  very  prolific.  Again,  beyond  the 
plains,  the  great  range  of  the  Atlas  Mountains  is 
inhabited  by  spirited  and  warlike  Berber  tribes, 
to  all  intents  and  purposes  unconquered.  Fortun- 
ately for  the  welfare  of  a  long  succession  of  Moorish 
Sultans,  these  great  tribes,  governed  by  hereditary 
chiefs,  were  nearly  always  on  bad  .terms  with  one 
another ;  and  one  of  the  most  important  results 
accomplished  by  the  French  Protectorate  Govern- 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  33 

ment  in  the  last  few  years  has  been  to  form  a 
league  of  the  southern  tribesmen.  Any  one  who 
knew  the  old  Morocco  could  scarcely  believe  that 
the  great  chiefs — the  Glaoui,  the  Mtougi,  the  Gin- 
dafi,  and  the  Rahamna  Kaid — would  ever  join 
hands,  even  in  the  interests  of  the  country.  But 
to-day  it  is  so.  , 

Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  was  able  to  leave  the  north 
in  a  state  of  peace  and  security.  New  Governors 
had  been  appointed,  and  Bou  Ahmed's  firm  hand 
had  made  itself  felt,  and  it  was  indispensable  that 
the  Court  should  move  south :  there  were  already 
signs  of  unrest  that  could  not  be  ignored. 

The  arrival  of  the  Sultan  in  the  southern  capital 
had  a  tranquillising  effect,  and  Bou  Ahmed  set 
to  work  to  restore  order  amongst  the  restive 
tribes  and  to  build  himself  a  palace — at  the  public 
expense.  For  six  years  he  continued  building, 
and  every  available  workman  and  artist  was 
employed.  The  result  was  grandiose,  and  the 
building  now  forms  the  "  Residency "  of  the 
French  Protectorate  Government.  The  "  Bahya  " 
— that  is  to  say,  "  The  Effulgence,"  as  the  palace 
is  called — consists  of  a  succession  of  handsome 
courtyards,  one  planted  with  cypress,  orange, 
lemon,  and  other  fruit  trees  and  flowers,  lead- 
ing one  out  of  the  other.  These  courts  are 
surrounded  by  arcades,  on  to  which  the  great 
rooms  open.  Everywhere  are  fountains  and  tanks 
of  water.  This  palace  must  cover  many  acres  of 
land,  and  though  quite  modern,  is  a  building  of 
singular  interest.  There  is  one  courtyard  which 

c 


34  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

is  particularly  beautiful,  where  the  Moorish  archi- 
tect based  his  art  on  the  traditions  of  the  past. 
The  walls  are  higher ;  the  woodwork  is  not  painted, 
as  is  usual,  in  polychrome;  while  the  court  itself 
is  not  nearly  as  large  as  some  of  the  others.  The 
rooms  themselves  are  perhaps  less  interesting  than 
the  courtyards  into  which  they  open,  though  in 
many  cases  the  elaborately  carved  and  painted 
ceilings  are  very  good. 

On  a  very  recent  visit  to  Marrakesh  I  was  able 
to  wander  at  leisure  over  this  great  palace,  accom- 
panied by  a  native  who  was  in  charge,  and  who 
knew  its  every  corner  and  turret,  for  he  had  been 
employed  on  its  construction.  I  had  seen  it  years 
before — or,  rather,  a  portion  of  it — for  I  had  twice 
been  entertained  at  dinner  by  its  owner,  the  fam- 
ous Bou  Ahmed.  I  recall  now  one  of  those  even- 
ings :  the  hot,  jasmine-scented  air  of  the  courts, 
for  it  was  late  in  spring,  and  the  great  dinner 
served  in  one  of  the  saloons,  while  a  native  band 
discoursed  anything  but  soft  music  just  outside ; 
and  Bou  Ahmed  himself — short,  dark,  and  of 
unprepossessing  appearance,  but  none  the  less  an 
excellent  host.  He  has  been  dead  now  for  twenty 
years,  and  his  property,  confiscated  by  the  Sultan 
on  his  death,  has  passed  into  other  hands.  His 
name  is  only  a  memory  of  the  past.  In  Morocco 
it  was  not,  "  How  are  the  mighty  fallen  !  "  but 
"  How  are  the  mighty  falling  !  "  for  almost  month 
by  month  some  great  Kaid,  some  Vizier,  or  some 
Prince  fell — and  fell  far  indeed. 

Bou  Ahmed  had  other  things  to  think  of  besides 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  35 

his  house.  There  was  grave  dissatisfaction  amongst 
some  of  the  tribes,  particularly  amongst  the 
Rahamna,  whose  extensive  territory  lies  imme- 
diately to  the  north  of  the  city  of  Marrakesh. 
A  leader,  Taher  ben  Suleiman,  had  arisen,  and 
under  his  influence  the  tribes  revolted.  The  local 
authorities  were  murdered  or  driven  out,  and  the 
rebellion  became  general.  Its  suppression  took 
long,  and  cost  much  in  lives  and  money.  On  one 
occasion  the  rebels  arrived  at  the  walls  of  Marra- 
kesh and  took  possession  of  the  northern  suburbs 
of  the  town,  but  were  driven  back.  Bou  Ahmed 
showed  considerable  ability  in  the  suppression  of 
this  revolt :  not  only  was  his  energy  unceasing, 
but  he  knew  also  how  to  utilise  the  jealousy  and 
mistrust  that  always  exists  among  the  rebels.  He 
worked  tribe  against  tribe,  and  division  against 
division.  The  Maghzen,  by  its  superiority  of 
organisation,  and  by  the  means  at  its  disposal 
to  obtain  men,  arms,  and  ammunition,  prevailed. 
The  Rahamna  rebellion  was  repressed,  and  hun- 
dreds of  square  miles  of  country  were  given  up 
to  fire,  the  sword,  and  pillage.  The  tribe  was 
almost  wiped  out ;  hundreds  died  in  prison  ;  the 
women  and  children  became  the  prey  of  the 
soldiery,  and  were  sold  or  driven  away  to  starve, 
and  devastation  reigned  supreme.  A  few  years 
later  I  travelled  through  the  Rahamna  country. 
It  was  still  deserted,  and  the  fields  were  grown 
over  with  thick  weeds  and  thorn-bushes.  Only 
a  few  most  miserable  black  tents,  with  half -starved 
inhabitants,  remained  where  once  the  rich  and 


36  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

flourishing  Rahamna  tribe  had  dwelt.  Taher 
ben  Suleiman  was  captured.  He  was  imprisoned 
in  a  cage  made  of  the  barrels  of  his  partisans' 
rifles — a  cage  so  small  that  he  could  scarcely 
move  in  it, — and  was  exhibited  to  the  public 
of  Marrakesh,  to  be  spat  upon  and  reviled.  He 
died  in  prison. 

As  long  as  Bou  Ahmed  lived  the  young  Sultan 
remained  in  the  palace.  True,  he  appeared  at 
ceremonies  and  celebrated  the  religious  feasts  in 
public,  but  he  was  a  nonentity.  Bou  Ahmed  alone 
governed  Morocco. 

In  1900  he  died.  I  was  in  Marrakesh  at  the 
time  of  his  last  illness,  when  he  lingered  on  day 
by  day,  kept  alive  by  inhalations  of  oxygen.  No 
one  cared,  unless  it  was  a  few  of  his  personal 
followers  and  attendants,  who  would  naturally 
suffer  by  his  demise.  As  for  the  rest,  there  was  a 
general  indifference.  He  had  never  been  popular, 
and  the  immense  fortune  he  had  amassed  and 
great  palace  he  had  constructed  awoke  the  jealousy 
of  others  who  had  the  same  desires  but  not  the 
same  opportunities.  He  was  feared  certainly,  for 
his  will  was  indomitable,  and  he  was  cruel.  A 
sort  of  superstitious  reverence  had  encircled  his 
life,  but  it  disappeared  when  sickness  laid  him 
low ;  and  when  he  breathed  his  last,  the  pent-up 
feelings  of  the  people  burst  forth,  and  they  rose 
up  and  cursed  him. 

The  death  of  a  great  personage  in  Morocco  is 
terrible,  and  for  several  days  as  the  Vizier  lay 
expiring,  guards  were  stationed  outside  his  palace 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  37 

waiting  in  silence  for  the  end.  And  then  one 
morning  the  wail  of  the  women  within  the  house 
told  that  death  had  come.  Every  gateway  of  the 
great  building  was  seized,  and  no  one  was  allowed 
to  enter  or  come  out,  while  within  there  was 
pandemonium.  His  slaves  pillaged  wherever  they 
could  lay  their  hands.  His  women  fought  and 
stole  to  get  possession  of  the  jewels.  Safes  were 
broken  open,  documents  and  title-deeds  were  ex- 
tracted, precious  stones  were  torn  from  their  set- 
tings the  more  easily  to  be  concealed,  and  even 
murder  took  place. 

While  all  this  was  proceeding  within  the  strictly 
guarded  walls,  Bou  Ahmed's  body  was  borne  out 
and  buried.  The  Sultan,  weeping,  followed  the 
bier  of  the  man  who  had  put  him  on  his  throne 
and  kept  him  there  through  those  difficult  years 
of  his  youth.  He  must,  indeed,  have  felt  himself 
alone  as  he  stood  beside  the  grave  of  his  Vizier, 
who,  whatever  may  have  been  his  faults,  however 
great  may  have  been  his  extortions,  had  been 
loyal  throughout.  When  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz,  still 
weeping,  had  returned  to  his  palace,  his  first  act 
was  to  sign  the  decree  for  the  confiscation  of  all 
Bou  Ahmed's  property.  It  was  now  organised 
loot,  for  officials  and  slaves  were  turned  loose  to 
carry  out  the  royal  commands.  For  days  laden 
baggage  animals,  half -concealed  under  great  masses 
of  furniture,  heaped  with  carpets  and  bedding,  or 
staggering  under  safes,  bore  Bou  Ahmed's  pro- 
perty into  the  Sultan's  palace.  His  women  and 
his  slaves  were  made  to  give  up  their  loot,  and 


38  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

the  house  was  left  empty  and  its  owners  penni- 
less. A  few  days  later  nothing  remained  but  the 
great  building — all  the  rest  had  disappeared  into 
space.  His  family  were  driven  out  to  starvation 
and  ruin,  his  slaves  were  taken  by  the  Sultan  to 
be  kept  or  sold,  and  his  vast  properties  passed 
into  the  possession  of  the  State.  It  was  the 
custom  of  the  country.  The  belongings  of  all 
State  functionaries  passed  at  death  to  their  lord 
and  master  the  Sultan.  I  see  Bou  Ahmed's  sons 
now  and  again.  They  are  in  complete  poverty, 
and  accept  as  presents  with  real  gratitude  the 
little  sums  which  an  upper  servant  in  England 
would  despise. 

The  accepting  of  small  presents  of  money  is,  in 
Morocco,  not  considered  by  any  means  derogatory, 
much  less  the  accepting  of  large  sums.  I  remember 
well  a  great-uncle  of  the  reigning  Sultan,  a  man 
who  had  been  Viceroy  in  his  time,  who  regularly 
toured  the  country  with  a  slave  or  two,  collecting 
alms.  He  was  a  pleasant  genial  old  gentleman, 
and  had  no  hesitation  in  asking  any  one  he  met 
to  help  him,  or  in  accepting  the  smallest  of  coins. 
On  one  occasion  he  arrived  at  the  residence  of  a 
native  ex-official  of  the  Moorish  Court,  who  lived 
in  Tangier.  There  was  a  tennis-party  going  on, 
and  the  guests,  amongst  whom  were  a  certain 
number  of  the  representatives  of  the  European 
Powers,  were  at  tea.  His  Highness  called  me  aside 
and  asked  who  all  these  Europeans  were.  "  They 
are,"  I  replied,  "  largely  the  Ministers  of  the 
foreign  Powers."  "  Aha,"  said  the  Prince,  "  they 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  39 

ought  to  be  good  for  a  pair  of  shoes  if  not  for  a 
cloak.  Rich  people,  rich  people."  I  was  able  to 
deter  him,  much  to  his  surprise,  by  explaining 
that  it  was  not  the  custom  in  Europe  for  members 
of  the  royal  families  to  ask  total  strangers  for 
coats,  or  even  shoes,  and  I  added  that  if  he  would 
wait  a  little  I  would  see  what  could  be  done. 
I  mentioned  the  Prince's  request  to  a  few  of  my 
friends,  and  we  subscribed  between  us  the  six 
francs  necessary  to  purchase  a  pair  of  yellow 
slippers,  the  only  footgear  of  the  country.  He 
was  graciously  pleased  to  accept  them  with  the 
dignity  of  a  Prince  of  the  Blood. 

The  death  of  Bou  Ahmed  naturally  brought 
about  changes  at  Court.  Whatever  jealousies  there 
may  have  existed  amongst  the  viziers,  and  no 
doubt  they  were  many,  they  realised  that  common 
action  was  necessary.  Each  might  have,  and 
probably  would  have,  to  defend  his  own  particular 
position  from  the  others,  but  collectively  they  had 
to  defend  their  united  positions  from  all  the  world. 
They  must  either  succeed  or  fall  together,  and 
they  determined  to  succeed. 

The  Sultan  was  now  about  twenty  years  of  age, 
and  might  at  any  moment  desire  to  assert  himself ; 
and  the  self-assertion  of  young  monarchs  of  auto- 
cratic power  and  no  experience  is  dangerous.  The 
viziers  realised  that  in  all  probability  the  dis- 
appearance of  the  strong  hand  of  Bou  Ahmed 
would  tempt  the  young  Sultan  to  become  more 
independent,  and  it  was  necessary  to  come  to  some 
arrangement  as  to  how  he  should  be  led  to  think 


40  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

and  act.  Certainly  it  must  not  be  in  the  direc- 
tion of  affairs  of  State — those  the  viziers  meant 
to  keep  to  themselves.  An  occupation  must  be 
found  for  the  inexperienced  and  hitherto  secluded 
monarch. 

It  was  the  exact  reverse  of  all  the  traditions  of 
Morocco ;  but  the  situation  was  an  unusual  one, 
for  there  had  never  been  a  Sultan  in  a  similar 
position.  The  viziers  felt  that  should  influence 
be  brought  to  bear  to  keep  him  in  his  palace  he 
might  rebel  against  this  enforced  seclusion,  and 
rid  himself,  and  probably  in  no  gentle  manner, 
of  the  men  who  had  instituted  it.  No ;  it  was 
clear  the  Sultan  must  be  amused,  and  his  amuse- 
ments must  be  so  numerous  and  so  varied  that 
his  entire  attention  would  be  distracted  from 
affairs  of  State.  Morocco  itself  could  not  supply 
the  novelties  that  would  be  required.  Such  plea- 
sures and  such  luxuries  as  the  country  could 
produce  were  his  already — women,  horses,  jewels, 
and  the  whole  paraphernalia  that  goes  to  make 
up  an  oriental  potentate's  surroundings.  For 
further  distractions  appeal  must  be  made  to 
Europe.  It  was  not  made  in  vain.  It  was  the 
beginning  of  the  great  debacle,  of  the  reckless 
extravagance,  of  the  follies  and  the  debts  that  led 
to  foreign  loans,  and  step  by  step  to  the  loss  of 
Morocco's  independence. 

A  strong  and  good  adviser  might  have  prolonged 
the  life  of  an  independent  Morocco,  for  although 
possessed  of  no  great  attainments  or  will-power, 
Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  was  thoughtful,  intelligent,  and 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  41 

desirous  of  doing  well.  It  was  no  easy  matter, 
however,  at  Marrakesh,  the  southern  capital,  where 
the  Court  was  at  this  time  in  residence,  to  keep 
the  young  Sultan  amused.  Situated  100  miles 
from  the  nearest  port,  which  itself  was  300  miles 
down  the  Atlantic  coast,  communication  with 
Europe  was  necessarily  very  slow,  and  the  Sultan's 
ever-increasing  orders  of  European  goods  took  long 
to  carry  out.  Often,  too,  the  heavy  Atlantic  swell 
rendered  communication  impossible  between  the 
ships  and  the  shore  for  weeks  together. 

The  Sultan's  caterers  were  at  their  last  resources. v 
Fireworks  were  played  out ;  bicycle  tricks  had  led 
to  bruises  and  sprains ;  and  even  photography 
had  lost  its  pristine  interest.  At  this  critical 
moment  came  word  of  a  belated  circus  at  one  of 
the  coast  towns.  It  must  naturally  have  been  a 
very  poor  circus  ever  to  have  found  itself  at  that 
dreary  little  port,  but  its  advent  was  welcomed 
as  enthusiastically  as  if  it  had  been  Barnum's 
entire  show.  Imperial  letters  were  directed  to  the 
local  Kaids  and  Governors,  agents  rushed  wildly 
to  and  fro,  and  eventually  the  circus,  bag  and 
baggage,  consisting  of  a  dozen  people  and  three 
or  four  horses,  started  out  across  the  weary  plains 
of  Morocco  to  obey  the  royal  command.  It  all 
took  time,  and  meanwhile  in  Court  circles  it  was 
the  absorbing  topic  of  conversation.  One  or  two 
serious  rebellions  among  the  tribes,  and  an  acute 
quarrel  with  the  Government  of  a  European  Power, 
passed  into  temporary  oblivion. 

Now,   the   proprietress   of  this   circus   was   an 


42  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

extremely  stout  Spanish  lady  of  uncertain  age, 
on  whose  corpulent  body  the  rough  jogging  on  a 
mule  for  more  than  a  hundred  miles  had  left  almost 
as  painful  an  impression  as  the  discomfort,  heat, 
and  worry  of  the  journey  had  upon  her  temper. 
She  herself  took  no  active  part  in  the  perform- 
ance, and  it  was  on  this  account,  to  her  intense 
indignation  and  wrath,  that  she  was  refused  admit- 
tance to  the  court  of  the  palace  in  which  the 
Sultan  was  to  witness  the  show.  His  Majesty's 
orders  were  that  none  but  the  actual  performers 
should  be  allowed  to  enter. 

So  the  fat  lady  and  one  or  two  of  the  employees 
of  the  circus  remained  in  an  outer  courtyard 
adjoining  the  enclosure  in  which  the  Sultan,  seated 
under  a  gorgeous  tent,  was  witnessing  the  per- 
formance. A  wall  some  twenty  feet  in  height 
separated  these  two  courts ;  and  in  the  outer  one, 
where  the  fat  lady  found  herself,  the  Sultan  had 
been  building  some  additions  to  the  palace,  and 
a  pile  of  stone,  mortar,  and  other  material  reached 
almost  to  the  top  of  the  wall.  The  lady  was  both 
angry  and  bored,  nor  were  a  herd  of  gazelle  and 
a  few  fine  specimens  of  mouflon — Barbary  wild 
sheep — that  roamed  about  the  enclosure  sufficient 
to  keep  her  amused. 

To  have  received  a  royal  command  to  come  all 
that  way  to  the  Moorish  capital,  and  then  to  be 
deprived  of  the  glory  of  seeing  her  own  circus 
performing  before  a  real  Sultan,  was  more  than 
she  could  bear,  and  she  straightway  began  to 
climb  the  great  heap  of  building  material  that  lay 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  43 

piled  against  the  wall.  It  was  hard  work,  nor 
was  her  figure  suited  for  such  mountain-climbing  ; 
but  she  was  to  receive  assistance  from  a  source 
undreamed  of.  Affected,  no  doubt,  by  her  slow 
progress  in  a  sport  of  which  he  himself  was  so 
proficient,  the  old  ram  mouflon  lightly  bounded 
after  her.  Balancing  himself  for  a  moment  on 
his  hind-legs,  he  lunged  forward  and  butted  the 
fat  lady  so  successfully  from  below  that  her  ascent 
was  materially  assisted.  In  a  series  of  repeated 
bounds,  owing  to  no  voluntary  action  on  her  own 
part,  she  found  herself  pantingly  grasping  the  top 
of  the  thick  wall. 

Meanwhile  the  performance  of  the  circus  was 
progressing  to  the  Sultan's  satisfaction.  Suddenly, 
however,  an  expression  of  wrathful  consternation 
became  visible  in  his  face,  and,  speechless,  he 
pointed  at  the  wall.  There,  far  above,  was  the 
agonised  and  purple  visage  of  the  fat  lady,  peering 
down  at  the  Sultan  and  his  Court.  In  a  moment 
the  officers  of  the  suite  were  shouting  and  gesticu- 
lating to  her  to  retire.  But  the  only  reply  they 
received  was  a  sudden  vision  of  a  considerable 
portion  of  her  immense  body,  as  a  playful  mouflon, 
himself  invisible,  gave  her  another  hoist  up.  At 
last  all  her  body  was  on  the  wall,  to  which  she 
clung  for  dear  life  with  arms  and  legs,  as  she  lay 
extended  on  its  summit.  It  was  at  this  moment 
that  the  mouflon  appeared.  With  a  majestic 
bound  he  leaped  on  to  the  summit,  stood  for  a 
moment  poised  on  his  hind-legs,  then  suddenly 
dropped,  and  with  a  terrific  prod  from  his  wide 


44  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

horns,  butted  the  fat  lady  at  least  a  yard 
along  the  wall.  He  was  evidently  intent  upon 
taking  her  round  the  entire  circuit  of  the  court- 
yard. 

For  a  few  moments  there  was  turmoil.  The 
Sultan  sat  silent  and  amazed,  while  the  Cabinet 
Ministers  all  shouted  to  the  lady  to  disappear, 
which  she  was  certainly  most  anxious  to  do.  The 
slaves,  more  wisely,  pelted  the  mouflon  with  stones, 
and  drove  him  from  his  point  of  vantage.  Then 
slowly  the  lady  disappeared — the  fat  legs  first, 
then  the  heaving  mass  of  body,  and  finally  even 
vfche  purple  face  was  seen  no  more. 

It  was  in  1901  that  I  became  personally  ac- 
quainted with  the  young  Sultan.  I  had  seen 
him  once  or  twice,  for  I  had  accompanied  Sir 
Arthur  Nicolson's  special  Mission  to  Marrakesh  in 
1896  ;  but  at  that  time  the  Sultan  had  not  emerged 
from  his  shell  of  reserve.  He  was  still  a  young 
boy,  evidently  very  shy,  and  entirely  under  the 
thumb  of  Bou  Ahmed,  the  famous  Grand  Vizier. 
One  audience  that  we  had  with  him  on  that  occa- 
sion was  not  without  interest.  We  had  ridden 
far  into  the  depths  of  the  great  Agdal  gardens 
to  a  summer-house,  where  His  Shereefian  Majesty 
was  waiting  to  receive  the  British  Minister.  A 
tangled  jungle  of  orange-trees ;  vines  climbing 
over  broken  trellis,  and  clinging  in  festoons  to 
great  cypresses ;  here  and  there  a  broken  marble 
fountain  or  a  tiny  stream — such  were  our  sur- 
roundings. With  our  escort  of  white-robed  Moorish 
cavalry,  led  by  the  Master  of  the  Ceremonies,  we 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  45 

rode  through  the  great  garden  to  dismount  before 
a  kiosk  of  arches  and  pillars,  of  green-glazed 
tiles  and  red  geometric  frescoes  on  a  yellow  wall. 
Everywhere  the  tangle  of  vegetation  had  over- 
grown its  borders.  The  cypresses  shot  up,  pillars 
of  dark  green,  above  the  building,  while  vine, 
jasmine,  and  geranium  strove  for  the  supremacy 
below.  Outside  the  building,  and  out  of  sight  of  ' 
its  occupants,  sat  a  row  of  Moorish  officers,  the 
Sultan's  attendants.  At  the  door  of  the  one  room 
that  the  kiosk  contained  —  for  it  seemed  all 
arches  and  pillars  without — stood  Bou  Ahmed,  the 
Vizier,  a  dark,  stout,  short  man,  showing  his  black 
origin  in  every  feature. 

Within,  opposite  the  doorway,  on  a  Louis  Seize 
settee,  was  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz.  He  was  seated 
cross-legged,  with  his  hands  folded  in  his  lap  and 
half -hidden  in  his  soft  white  raiment.  I  remember 
being  particularly  struck  with  his  pale  complexion 
and  his  evident  shyness.  At  the  side  of  the  divan 
was  a  chair,  where  the  British  Minister  was  in- 
vited to  be  seated,  while  we  who  were  in  attend- 
ance stood  around  the  door.  The  Sultan  himself 
said  little,  and  that  little  was  addressed  to  his 
Vizier  in  almost  a  whisper,  and  repeated  by  him 
to  the  British  Minister.  In  a  few  minutes  Mulai 
Abdul  Aziz  had  largely  recovered  his  self-posses- 
sion, and  was  busy  taking  in  every  item  of  the 
uniforms  worn  by  the  Minister's  suite.  He  could 
scarcely  keep  his  eyes  off  one  man — the  present 
Lord  Loch — whose  six  feet  five,  capped  by  an 
enormous  busby,  was  of  evidently  entrancing  in- 


46  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

terest  to  His  Majesty.  Four  years  later,  talking 
to  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  in  the  intimacy  of  personal 
friendship,  I  reminded  him  of  this  episode.  He 
laughingly  replied  that  he  had  certainly  been  more 
struck  with  his  height  and  uniform  than  anything 
else  on  that  Mission,  and  requested  me  to  ask  the 
British  Minister  whether  it  would  not  be  possible 
for  Lord  Loch  to  accompany  a  second  embassy 
that  was  to  start  a  few  months  later.  This  message 
duly  reached  the  authorities  at  home,  and  in 
January  1902  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz,  no  longer  shy, 
had  the  pleasure — and  it  was  an  evident  pleasure 
— of  once  more  welcoming  Lord  Loch  at  his  Court. 
I  little  thought  at  their  first  meeting,  when  I 
watched  the  young  Sultan's  shy  interest  in  the 
big  Guardsman,  that  a  few  years  later  I  should 
witness  the  same  Guardsman  instructing  the  same 
Sultan  in  the  mysteries  of  "  tip-and-run  "  in  an 
enclosure  of  the  Shereefian  Palace. 

My  first  private  audience  with  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz 
was  in  the  summer  of  1901.  After  a  considerable 
delay,  largely  owing  to  the  discussion  of  the  kind 
of  obeisance  I  was  prepared  to  make  in  entering 
His  Majesty's  presence,  I  was  honoured  with  a 
private  audience.  I  found  His  Majesty  courteous, 
pleasant,  and  intelligent.  He  was  easy  to  amuse, 
and  by  my  departure  from  the  austere  etiquette 
of  the  Court  in  not  confining  my  remarks  to 
replies  to  His  Majesty's  questions,  although  at  first 
it  seemed  a  little  to  surprise  him,  I  succeeded  in 
gaining  his  attention  and  amusement.  I  had  been 
told  that  my  audience  would  be  very  formal  and 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  47 

last  a  few  minutes.  It  lasted  over  an  hour.  The 
Sultan  was  seated,  and  I  remained  standing  the 
whole  time — to  which  I  could  not  very  well  object. 
In  any  case,  I  had  overcome  the  difficulty  of  my 
reception  by  refusing  point-blank  to  go  down  on 
my  knees  and  to  touch  the  floor  with  my  fore- 
head— a  form  of  salutation  which  was  being  prac- 
tised by  the  Europeans  in  His  Majesty's  service, 
for  already  he  had  begun  to  increase  his  Christian 
entourage.  I  had  stated  that  I  was  prepared  to 
enter  the  Sultan's  presence  in  adopting  the  same 
formalities  as  I  did  in  the  presence  of  my  own 
sovereign,  and  the  Sultan  had  accepted  that 
formula.  Almost  the  first  question  he  asked  me 
was  if  I  had  ever  been  received  in  private  audience 
by  my  own  King.  I  replied  that  I  had  experienced 
that  honour.  He  then  asked  what  obeisance  I 
had  made.  I  replied  that  I  had  bowed  on  enter- 
ing the  room,  and  again  on  approaching  His 
Majesty's  person.  The  Sultan  seemed  surprised, 
and  demanded  why  it  was  the  Englishmen  in  his 
service  carried  out  the  Moorish  form  of  etiquette 
by  kneeling  and  touching  the  floor  with  their 
foreheads  ?  I  could  only  protest  that  I  didn't 
know,  except  to  surmise  that,  as  they  were  in  the 
service  of  a  Moorish  Sultan,  they  probably  thought 
they  ought  to  adopt  the  traditional  Moorish  form 
of  obeisance.  The  Sultan  gave  orders  that  it  was 
to  be  discontinued,  though,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
the  Europeans  in  his  service  still  continued  to  use 
it  on  the  great  feast-days  of  the  year  until  the 
end  of  his  reign.  A  few  years  later,  on  one  of 


48  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

these  occasions  I  saw  a  long  line  of  Englishmen 
drop  on  to  their  knees  and  bow  their  foreheads 
to  the  ground  as  the  Sultan  approached.  It  is  a 
matter  of  personal  option,  based  on  prejudice.  It 
seems  to  me  that  any  human  being  has  a  right 
to  act  in  such  matters  just  as  he  thinks  right. 
That  he  demeans  himself  or  his  country  by  so 
doing  appears  to  me  ridiculous.  An  Englishman, 
and  much  less  England,  cannot  be  demeaned  by 
any  fantastic  gymnastics.  I  preferred  not  to  do 
it  solely  for  the  reason  that  it  seemed  to  me  to 
be  absurd,  just  as  half  the  ceremonies  at  a  British 
coronation  would  appear  absurd  and  meaningless 
to  a  Moor.  Nearly  all  etiquette  is  ridiculous,  only 
we  are  more  or  less  accustomed  to  it,  and  have 
largely  modified  its  eccentricities.  I  have  experi- 
enced things  nearly  as  absurd  as  this  Moorish 
custom  in  other  Courts.  Some  years  ago,  on  one 
of  the  very  hottest  days  of  a  hot  summer  in  a 
country  of  Southern  Europe,  I  had  the  honour  to 
be  received  by  the  sovereign.  I  arrived  at  the 
palace  at  half-past  ten  in  the  morning  and  left  it 
at  one  o'clock.  The  king  in  question  was  dressed 
in  the  heavy  blue  uniform  of  an  admiral ;  I  was  in 
a  frock-coat.  The  thermometer,  even  in  the  room, 
must  have  been  in  or  very  near  the  nineties. 
Yet  we  stood  the  whole  time— for  two  hours  and 
a  half.  At  half-past  two  I  was  summoned  back 
to  the  palace  to  complete  this  long  but  interesting 
audience.  With  a  sigh  of  relief  His  Majesty  said, 
"  I  think  this  time  we  can  sit  down."  And  we 
did.  Why  on  earth  we  hadn't  sat  down  in  the 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  49 

morning  during  all  those  perspiring  hours  Heaven 
only  knows.  I  could  have  understood  a  king 
sitting  and  his  visitor  being  made  to  stand,  but 
mutual  discomfort  and  fatigue  in  such  a  case  and 
for  such  a  length  of  time  appears  to  me  to  be 
almost  childish  folly. 

The  Moorish  protocol  would  have  compared 
favourably  with  this  European  etiquette.  The 
Moorish  visitor  would  have  made  his  lowly  obei- 
sance to  the  sovereign,  but  this  done  he  would 
have  squatted  down,  more  or  less  comfortably, 
in  his  Sultan's  presence,  and  remained  seated  till 
the  end  of  the  audience.  It  seemed  to  me  to  be 
preferable.  But  etiquette  is  all  a  question  of 
custom  and  habit.  Take  kissing,  for  example. 
How  well  every  man  must  remember  how,  when  a 
small  boy,  he  feared  that  his  mother  might  kiss 
him  in  the  presence  of  his  schoolfellows.  In  after 
years,  when  it  is  too  late,  how  he  would  have 
treasured  those  lost  kisses  were  they  now  obtain- 
able !  What  amusement,  too,  the  kissing  of  foreign 
men  on  the  railway  platforms  of  the  continent 
has  caused  us !  But  witness  the  meeting  of  two 
great  Morocco  chiefs — the  stately  approach,  the 
last  few  more  hurried  steps,  and  the  graceful  em- 
brace as  each  bends  forward  and  kisses  the  other's 
shoulder.  I  have  seen  the  meeting  of  great  men 
in  Morocco  in  the  hour  of  sorrow,  when  they 
have  fallen  upon  each  other's  necks  and  wept. 
How  few  soldiers  know  that  the  origin  of  the 
salute  they  give  to-day  comes  from  the  East,  and 
is  really  no  more  than  the  movement  of  the  sub- 

D 


50  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

ject  to  shield  from  his  eyes  the  effulgent  glory  of 
his  sovereign,  only  to-day  it  applies  equally  to 
the  effulgent  glory  of  his  second  lieutenant  as  well. 
Habit  is  everything,  and  prejudice  scarcely  less. 

These  were  the  first  days  of  the  toys  and  fire- 
works at  the  Moorish  Court.  For  a  time  the 
t  latter  were  paramount,  and  almost  nightly  the 
southern  capital  was  illumined  by  the  reflection 
of  Catherine-wheels  and  startled  by  the  flashing 
of  the  many  colours  of  marvellous  rockets.  A  man 
was  brought  especially  from  England  to  show  and 
prepare  the  fireworks,  and  he  became  a  permanent 
member  of  His  Majesty's  suite.  The  natives  were 
partly  amused,  partly  shocked.  Thrifty  as  the 
Moor  is  by  nature,  he  could  not  overlook  the 
wild  extravagance  of  this  manner  of  spending 
money,  and  the  fireworks  by  the  time  they  had 
arrived  in  Marrakesh  had  cost  a  pretty  price. 
Freight,  insurance,  and  the  long  caravan  trans- 
port from  the  cost  had  to  be  added  to  the  original 
cost,  and  there  was  an  item  known  as  commission. 
They  were  certainly  very  beautiful  fireworks  and 
very  expensive.  I  was  present  at  a  display  given 
to  amuse  a  British  Minister,  who  highly  dis- 
approved of  this  extravagance,  but  could  not 
refuse  the  invitation.  There  was  a  set  piece  of 
an  enormous  elephant,  and  the  show  concluded 
with  a  waterfall  of  fire  in  a  new  shade  of  pink, 
just  discovered,  and  accordingly  of  elevated  price. 
It  was  certainly  very  beautiful,  but  it  was  very 
useless  and  very  dear. 

One   afternoon  the   Sultan   informed   me   that 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  51 

there  would  be  a  display  that  night  in  the  palace 
grounds,  but  that  it  was  for  the  "  palace  " — that 
was  to  say,  the  ladies — and  no  men  would  be 
invited ;  but  if  I  went  up  on  to  the  roof  of  the 
house  in  which  I  was  living,  I  should  no  doubt 
be  able  to  witness  something  of  it.  I  watched 
the  beautiful  rockets  of  every  colour  rise  in  their 
streaks  of  fire  into  the  wonderful  sapphire  blue 
of  the  sky  of  the  southern  night,  to  burst  with 
their  thousand  stars,  filling  the  whole  scene  of  the 
flat  house-tops  of  the  old  city  with  the  pale  glow 
of  greens  and  pinks  and  yellows.  In  the  "  Jumma 
el-Fenaa  " — the  open  place  that  lies  in  the  centre 
of  the  city — the  crowds  stood  and  watched  the 
rockets  as  they  rose  over  the  high  walls  of  the 
palace  half  a  mile  away. 

The  next  day  the  Sultan  asked  me  what  I  had 
thought  of  the  display.  I  spoke  of  its  beauty,  and 
hinted  at  its  waste.  I  mentioned  the  crowd  in 
the  square.  "  What  did  the  people  say  ?  "  asked 
the  Sultan.  "  I  didn't  hear  much,"  I  replied ; 
"  but  on  several  occasions  some  one  would  cry 
out,  '  There  goes  another  thousand  dollars  of  our 
money.' 3 

Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  had  expected  to  hear  his  own 
praises  sung  for  having  presented  the  brilliant 
spectacle  to  the  people  of  his  city,  and  my  answer 
surprised  him.  It  was,  however,  not  without 
effect,  or  perhaps  he  was  growing  tired  of  coloured 
fires,  for  there  was  a  great  diminution  in  these 
displays,  although  the  professional  exhibitor  re- 
mained for  some  time  later  at  the  palace. 


52  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

Throughout  the  many  months  that  I  spent  at 
the  Moorish  Court,  I  always  felt  that  a  catastrophe 
must  eventually  happen.  The  Sultan  was  evidently 
being  led  upon  the  road  to  ruin,  and  near  him  as 
I  was,  all  my  efforts  to  persuade  him  of  the  fact 
were  in  vain.  On  more  than  one  occasion,  par- 
ticularly towards  the  end  of  1902,  I  implored  him, 
in  language  which  he  smilingly  told  me  no  one 
had  ever  ventured  to  address  to  him  before,  to 
pull  himself  up  in  time.  He  was  kind,  thanked 
me  for  being  so  outspoken,  and  continued  his 
pro-European  proclivities  and  his  extravagances. 
Had  he  at  that  time  dismissed  the  greater  number 
of  his  European  employees,  leaving  only  his  doctor, 
an  engineer  or  two,  and  any  one  who  had  been 
in  his  father's  employ,  and  ceased  spending  his 
money,  the  whole  future  of  Morocco  might  have 
been  changed. 

His  afternoons  in  Marrakesh  were  given  up  to 
play.  More  than  once,  always  accompanied  by 
Menebhi,  the  Minister  of  War,  and  some  of  his 
European  employees,  we  rode  in  the  immense 
wilderness  of  gardens  of  the  Agdal  Palace.  At  the 
edge  of  a  great  square  tank  we  would  dismount, 
and  sometimes  went  for  a  row  in  one  of  the  various 
boats  that  he  kept  there.  On  one  occasion  His 
Majesty  and  his  Minister  rowed — very  badly  in- 
deed— while  I,  the  only  other  occupant  of  the 
boat,  steered.  The  Sultan,  who  rowed  bow,  caught 
several  crabs,  and  splashed  poor  Menebhi  all  over. 
The  Minister  of  War  rowed  about  one  hundred 
short  strokes  to  the  minute,  whilst  the  Sultan, 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  53 

struggling  with  his  oars,  rowed  about  ten  extremely 
long  ones.  But  both  were  hugely  delighted  with 
the  performance,  and  our  spirits  were  of  the 
highest. 

"  We  are  both  boatmen,  and  you  are  the  pas- 
senger. We  are  crossing  a  Moorish  ferry,"  cried 
the  Sultan. 

Entering  into  the  Sultan's  little  joke,  I  replied 
"  that  they  were  the  worst  ferrymen  I  had  ever 
seen,  and  that  on  landing  I  should  complain  to 
the  authorities  of  their  incapacity." 

"  Oh,  you  will,  will  you  ?  "  replied  Mulai  Abdul 
Aziz.  "  Then  all  I  can  say  is,  we  won't  put  you 
ashore  until  you  pay  us." 

"  Then  I'll  stop  here." 

"  All  right,"  replied  the  Sultan  ;  and  he  promptly 
began  to  splash  me  with  all  his  might  and  main, 
though  poor  Menebhi  was  getting  as  wet  as  I  was. 

"  Will  you  pay  ?  "  asked  His  Majesty. 

"  Willingly,"  I  laughed.    "  How  much  ?  " 

"  Half  a  peseta  each "  (about  4d.),  answered 
the  Sultan,  and  they  duly  pocketed  their  fee. 
It  was  the  first  time  in  my  life  I  had  tipped  a 
Sultan  and  a  Minister  of  War. 

In  the  autumn  of  1902  I  was  invited  to  accom- 
pany the  royal  progress  to  the  northern  capital, 
Fez. 

The  Sultan's  departure  from  Marrakesh,  where 
he  had  now  been  in  residence  for  some  six  years, 
had  been  expected  earlier  in  the  autumn  ;  but 
constant  delays  occurred,  and  although  the  im- 
perial tents  had  been  for  some  time  pitched  out- 


54  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

side  the  city  gates,  it  was  not  until  late  in  November 
that  a  start  was  made.  Early  one  morning,  sur- 
rounded by  all  the  characteristic  pomp  pertaining 
to  the  Sultanate  of  Morocco,  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz 
left  his  palace  in  the  southern  capital  for  the  first 
camp  of  his  northward  march. 

There  is  no  necessity  to  describe  day  by  day 
the  Sultan's  progress.  The  etiquette  and  formali- 
ties of  each  were  almost  identical,  though  the  scene 
was  an  ever- varying  one,  changing  with  the  nature 
of  the  country  traversed.  An  account  of  one  day, 
picked  out  at  hazard,  will  be  sufficient  to  give 
an  idea  of  the  whole.  Long  before  daylight  the 
great  camp  was  astir,  and  when,  soon  after  3  A.M., 
the  morning  gun  was  fired,  a  number  of  tents 
had  already  been  struck,  horses  saddled,  and  mules 
and  camels  packed  for  the  march.  In  the  moon- 
light and  early  dawn  the  scene  was  one  of  great 
beauty — an  indistinct  medley  of  white  tents,  here 
silvery  in  the  moonlight,  there  ruddy  with  the 
glow  of  camp-fires,  whose  tall  red  columns  of 
smoke  rose  pillar-like  into  the  still  air.  In  and 
about  the  tents  passed  the  shadowy  forms  of  men 
and  animals.  As  if  by  magic  the  scene  was  ever 
changing,  as  tent  after  tent  silently  fell  to  the 
ground,  until  with  the  first  glow  of  dawn  there 
remained  of  the  great  encampment  only  the  canvas- 
walled  enclosure  containing  the  Sultan's  tents,  and 
a  plain  covered  with  horsemen  and  thousands 
upon  thousands  of  baggage  mules  and  camels. 
Already  the  cavalry  were  massed  near  the  Sultan's 
enclosure,  the  horsemen  forming  an  open  square, 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  55 

in  the  centre  of  which,  surrounded  by  the  Ministers 
of  State,  lay  a  crimson-curtained  palanquin  with 
its  couch  of  turquoise  blue.  From  the  entrance  of 
the  Sultan's  tents  to  the  square  of  cavalry  a 
double  line  was  formed  by  white-robed,  red-capped 
officials,  awaiting  His  Majesty. 

A  bugle  sounds  clear  in  the  still  atmosphere, 
and  a  moment  later  a  great  cry  rends  the  air. 
There  is  a  beating  of  drums  and  a  sound  of  trum- 
pets, as  a  solitary  white  figure,  erect  and  dignified, 
walks  slowly  through  the  bowing  lines  of  officials, 
enters  the  square  of  horsemen,  and  seats  himself 
upon  the  blue  divan.  Again  arises  the  cry  of  wel- 
come, as,  bending  forward,  the  tribes  greet  their 
Sultan  with  the  salutation,  "  May  God  prolong 
the  life  of  our  Lord." 

The  sun  has  risen  now,  his  first  rays  falling  upon 
the  gold-orbed  banners,  heavy  with  brocades  and 
silks  that  wave  high  above  the  heads  of  the 
cavalry ;  then  upon  the  wild  horsemen  themselves, 
their  saddles  of  brilliant  reds  and  greens,  half- 
hidden  in  the  heavy  folds  of  their  long  white 
garments,  and  the  scene  becomes  one  of  indescrib- 
able beauty.  One  by  one  the  Sultan's  tents  are 
struck,  and  the  great  canvas-walled  enclosure 
vanishes  under  the  hands  of  hundreds  of  skilled 
tent-pitchers.  Sometimes  His  Majesty  gives  an 
audience  to  an  official,  a  local  governor  of  a  tribe, 
who,  barefoot,  approaches  the  Sultan,  falls  upon 
his  knees,  and  three  times  touches  the  ground 
with  his  forehead,  remaining  crouched  before 
his  lord  and  master  during  the  few  seconds  that 


56  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

such  audiences  last.  Again  a  bugle ;  and  through 
the  line  of  horsemen  run  dusky  soldiers  leading 
saddled  horses,  trotting  them  past  the  Sultan 
that  he  may  choose  upon  the  back  of  which 
he  will  perform  the  day's  march.  With  a  slight 
motion  of  his  hand  the  choice  is  made,  and  the 
honoured  steed  is  led  up  to  the  palanquin.  Some- 
times it  is  a  white,  saddled  and  trapped  in  tur- 
quoise blue ;  sometimes  a  grey,  decked  in  rose- 
coloured  silks ;  sometimes  a  black,  his  head  half 
hidden  in  primrose-yellow  tassels. 

As  the  Sultan  mounts,  the  scene  becomes  for  a 
few  minutes  one  of  wild  confusion.  The  banner- 
bearers,  the  spear-bearers,  the  cavalry,  the  scarlet- 
and-blue  mounted  infantry,  the  high  officials  on 
their  saddle-mules,  the  artillery,  even  the  Sultan 
himself,  seems  hopelessly  mixed  in  a  struggling 
crowd.  It  is  only  for  a  very  little  while,  and  then 
from  the  medley  emerges  the  royal  procession, 
forming  into  order  as  it  proceeds.  The  vanguard 
is  formed  of  an  escort  of  cavalry,  headed  by  the 
standard-bearers,  carrying  flags  of  every  hue  and 
colour,  the  poles  topped  with  glittering  balls. 
Next  come  the  artillery,  the  guns  carried  upon 
the  backs  of  mules,  and  after  them  a  troop  of 
mounted  infantry.  Two  mounted  men,  carrying 
long  slender  spears,  precede  the  led  horses,  five 
or  six  of  which,  trapped  in  rich  silks,  always  form 
a  feature  of  the  procession.  Riding  alone  is  the 
Grand  Master  of  the  Ceremonies,  a  dark  man  of 
fine  presence,  wand  of  office  in  hand.  Then,  after 
a  space  of  some  forty  yards,  the  Sultan,  a  solitary 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  57 

white  figure  on  horseback.  At  his  side  run  negroes, 
waving  long  white  scarves  to  keep  the  dust  and 
the  flies  off  his  holy  person.  Immediately  behind 
His  Majesty  rides  a  soldier,  bearing  aloft,  so  as 
to  shade  the  Sultan  from  the  rays  of  the  sun, 
the  Imperial  parasol  of  crimson  and  gold.  The 
red  palanquin,  borne  by  sturdy  mules,  follows, 
and  behind  it  a  long  wide  line  of  standard-bearers, 
the  banners  rich  in  gold  thread  and  brocaded 
silks,  and  the  poles  of  one  and  all  crowned  with 
gilded  orbs.  Immediately  behind  the  flags  ride 
the  viziers  and  great  officers  of  State,  followed  by 
a  rabble  of  smaller  officials  and  soldiery,  of  black 
slaves  and  tribesmen  from  all  over  Morocco. 

There  are  no  roads,  and  the  procession  of  men 
and  animals  spreads  widely  out  over  the  plains 
and  undulating  hills.  Often  as  far  as  the  eye  can 
reach  one  can  trace  the  great  migration  stretching 
from  horizon  to  horizon,  a  rainbow  of  colour  upon 
the  green  plains.  Sometimes  to  cross  a  valley  the 
procession  narrows  in,  to  spread  out  again  in  the 
open  country  beyond,  till  the  whole  land  is  dotted 
with  horsemen  and  mules,  and  slow-gaited  lumber- 
ing camels. 

Now  and  again  a  tribal  governor,  with  his  escort 
of  horsemen,  comes  to  sahite  his  sovereign.  Drawn 
up  in  a  long  line  they  await  the  Sultan's  approach. 
At  his  approach  the  governor  dismounts  from  his 
horse  and  prostrates  himself  before  his  lord,  to 
rise  again  at  a  signal  from  His  Majesty.  Bending 
low,  he  approaches  and  kisses  the  Sultan's  stirrup, 
then  mounts  again,  and  with  a  hoarse  cry  of 


58  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

welcome  the  tribesmen  dig  their  spurs  into  the 
flanks  of  their  barbs  and  gallop  pell-mell  hither 
and  thither,  now  singly,  now  in  line,  firing  their 
guns  the  while,  until  the  horses  are  brought  to 
a  sudden  standstill  in  a  cloud  of  smoke  and  dust. 
These  tribesmen  are  not  the  only  people  who 
come  from  afar  to  greet  the  Sultan  on  his  march. 
There  are  beggars  and  representatives  of  all  the 
dervish  sects,  from  cymbal-beating  negroes  from 
the  Sudan  to  the  Hamacha  of  Meknes,  who  cut 
open  their  heads  with  hatchets.  There  are  snake- 
charmers  and  acrobats,  and  men  with  performing 
apes ;  little  deputations  of  country  Jews  and 
Jewesses ;  groups  of  white-robed  scholars  from 
local  mosques,  bearing  white  flags ;  veiled  Arab 
women,  uttering  shrill  trembling  cries  of  welcome, 
and  offering  bowls  of  milk ;  lepers  with  their 
faces  swathed  and  wearing  great  straw  hats,  bear- 
ing bowls  of  wood  to  collect  alms  in,  for  none  may 
touch  them — a  thousand  scenes  of  human  life, 
with  all  its  pleasures  and  all  its  tragedies. 

On  the  sixth  day's  march  one  of  the  largest 
rivers  in  Morocco,  the  Oum  er-Rebia,  had  to  be 
forded.  Fortunately  the  autumn  rains  had  not 
yet  fallen,  and  the  river  presented  no  great  obstacle 
to  the  passage  of  so  large  a  caravan.  Almost  the 
first  to  ride  across  was  the  Sultan,  his  horse  sur- 
rounded by  negroes  on  foot,  while  a  line  of  expert 
swimmers  were  held  in  readiness,  linked  hand  in 
hand,  stretched  from  bank  to  bank.  For  over 
three  hours  the  procession  steadily  waded  through, 
and  though  many  a  mule  fell  and  many  a  man 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  59 

and  pack  were  soaked,  no  serious  accidents  oc- 
curred. It  was  a  scene  of  wild  confusion  as  the 
horsemen  and  laden  animals  climbed  down  the 
steep  bank  to  the  water's  edge  and  entered  the 
swiftly-flowing  river ;  but  in  the  end  all  got  across 
in  safety,  and  great  were  the  rejoicings  and  many 
the  congratulations  that  night  in  camp,  for  it  is 
seldom  that  a  Sultan  and  his  vast  following  have 
crossed  the  Oum  er-Rebia  without  paying  a  toll  in 
human  lives. 

Usually  a  ride  about  four  hours  brings  the 
Sultan  to  his  next  camping-ground.  A  quarter 
of  an  hour  before  reaching  the  selected  spot  the 
bands  commence  to  play,  and  the  tribesmen,  the 
cavalry,  and  mounted  infantry  gallop  ahead,  form- 
ing into  two  lines,  between  which  His  Majesty 
rides  into  a  square  of  horsemen  drawn  up  in  the 
same  formation  as  that  of  the  early  morning. 
The  crimson  palanquin  is  quickly  unharnessed,  the 
blue  divan  arranged,  and  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  seats 
himself  in  solitary  state  to  await  the  pitching  of 
his  encampment. 

No  tent  might  be  raised  in  the  camp  until  the 
gilded  globe  which  surmounts  the  Sultan's  prin- 
cipal tent  is  in  position ;  but  it  required  only  a 
very  short  time  for  the  skilled  tent-pitchers  to 
pitch  the  great  mass  of  canvas  crowned  with  its 
glittering  orb.  It  is  a  signal  to  the  rest  of  the 
camp,  and  almost  as  if  growing  from  the  ground 
arose  the  white  canvas  town.  There  was  no  con- 
fusion, no  noise.  Every  one  knew  the  right  posi- 
tion to  pitch  in,  and  the  whole  system  worked 


60  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

without  a  hitch.  Probably  the  Moors  are  alone 
in  the  pitching  of  these  great  camps ;  it  seems  a 
hereditary  trait  in  their  characters.  Sultan  after 
Sultan,  ever  since  the  Empire  of  Morocco  first 
came  under  the  dominion  of  the  Arabs,  had 
travelled  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  that  in 
which  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  was  making  the  journey 
from  Marrakesh  to  Rabat.  In  no  detail  had  it 
changed.  The  very  shape  and  decoration  of  the 
tents  had  never  varied,  and  to  such  an  extent 
had  conservatism  been  maintained,  the  Sultan 
told  the  writer,  that,  so  far  from  travelling  with 
all  the  luxury  that  one  could  imagine,  he  was 
forbidden  by  the  unwritten  laws  of  tradition  to 
cover  the  floor  of  his  State  tent,  except  for  three 
small  carpets.  The  rest  of  the  floor-space  must 
consist  of  the  soil  of  the  country,  and  this,  on  the 
day  which  His  Majesty  narrated  the  fact,  was 
perhaps  four  inches  deep  in  almost  liquid  black 
mud.  Outside  his  tent  he  may  lay  down  straw  or 
matting,  or  any  covering  he  may  please,  but 
within  there  must  be  nothing. 

The  Sultan's  principal  tent  once  up,  the  tent- 
pitchers  turned  their  attention  to  the  remainder 
of  his  camp,  consisting  of  some  half-dozen  large 
marquees,  the  whole — an  acre  perhaps  of  ground 
— being  enclosed  with  a  nine-feet  wall  of  white 
canvas,  decorated  in  patterns  of  dark  blue.  This 
private  encampment  of  His  Majesty  formed  the 
centre  of  the  camp,  which  stretched  away  on  all 
sides,  often  for  nearly  half  a  mile  in  every  direc- 
tion. At  the  outer  extremity  were  pitched  the 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  61 

tents  of  the  infantry,  so  close  to  one  another  that 
entrance  and  exit  to  the  camp  was  only  possible 
at  certain  intervals,  where  spaces  were  left  for  the 
purpose. 

The  greatest  interest  naturally  attached  to  the 
immediate  surroundings  of  the  Sultan's  tents.  No 
one  but  his  ladies  and  their  female  slaves  might 
enter  the  walled  enclosure,  with  the  exception  of 
one  small  portion  of  it  divided  off  from  the  rest, 
retained  for  unofficial  audiences.  His  Majesty 
transacted  all  his  affairs  of  State  outside  the  en- 
closure, in  a  tent  of  scarlet  and  green  cloth,  pitched 
at  the  end  of  a  large  open  square,  and  visible  from 
a  considerable  distance.  Here  before  the  eyes  of 
the  public  His  Majesty  received  his  Ministers, 
attended  to  his  correspondence,  and  sealed  official 
documents.  Near  this  tent,  known  as  the  "  Si  wan," 
were  two  large  marquees,  one  used  as  a  mosque, 
the  other  the  office  of  the  viziers.  In  this  quarter, 
too,  were  the  offices  of  the  other  Ministers  of  State 
and  high  officials.  Behind  these  were  the  private 
encampments  of  the  more  important  personages, 
often  consisting  of  several  very  large  tents  leading 
to  one  another  by  covered  passages  of  canvas. 
Directly  opposite,  on  the  farther  side  of  the  Sultan's 
enclosure,  were  the  royal  stables,  where  a  quantity 
of  fine  barbs  were  tethered,  their  number  con- 
stantly being  added  to  by  the  presents  brought 
to  His  Majesty  by  the  tribal  governors. 

As  soon  as  his  tents  were  ready,  the  Sultan 
remounted  his  horse,  and  amidst  the  playing  of 
bands  and  the  shouts  of  the  tribesmen,  rode  into 


62  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

the  seclusion  of  his  private  camp.  It  was  generally 
not  long  after  His  Majesty's  disappearance  from 
view  that  a  long  line  of  white-robed  and  veiled 
women,  mounted  upon  mules,  passed  silently 
amongst  the  tents  and  entered  the  royal  precincts. 
As  they  filed  through  the  camp  every  man  turned 
his  head  away  from  the  mysterious  white  pro- 
cession. Usually  the  whole  camp  was  pitched  by 
midday,  and  not  long  after  that  hour  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  Government  quarters  became  astir 
with  life.  The  white-robed  viziers  sought  their 
offices,  while  soldiers  kept  order  amongst  the 
throng  of  people  that  were  always  crowding  near 
the  tent  doors  awaiting  audiences  with  the  Minis- 
ters of  State.  Only  the  "  Siwan  "  was  deserted, 
but  not  for  long.  A  bugle  sounds.  There  is  a 
hurrying  to  and  fro  of  officials  and  soldiers,  and 
again  the  cry,  "  God  prolong  the  life  of  our  Lord," 
is  heard,  and  the  solitary  white  figure,  round 
whom  all  this  great  camp  revolves,  is  seen  slowly 
entering  under  the  shadow  of  the  tent  of  scarlet 
and  green. 

His  Majesty  usually  gave  some  two  or  three 
hours  a  day  to  the  consideration  of  affairs  of  State, 
though,  on  the  occasions  on  which  the  great  cara- 
van did  not  travel  and  no  journey  was  made,  a 
considerably  longer  period  was  put  aside  for  public 
business.  Meanwhile,  in  another  quarter  of  the 
camp,  provisions  and  fodder  were  being  distri- 
buted to  the  vast  concourse  of  people  who  follow 
His  Majesty  upon  these  royal  progresses.  Yet,  in 
spite  of  the  fact  that  some  thirty  thousand  persons 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  63 

and  probably  twenty  thousand  horses  and  mules 
had  to  be  fed,  the  commissariat  worked  without 
a  hitch,  and  food  and  fodder  were  supplied  in  an 
incredibly  short  period  of  time  to  all  those  who 
had  a  right  to  receive  it.  The  local  tribes  alone 
were  dependent  upon  their  own  resources,  and, 
with  this  exception,  the  Sultan  feeds  the  whole 
camp.  Up  till  the  time  of  this  journey  of  Mulai 
Abdul  Aziz  the  march  of  a  Sultan  through  a  dis- 
trict was  sufficient  to  bring  ruin  upon  the  people, 
so  extortionate  were  the  demands  made  upon 
them.  But  he  would  have  none  of  this,  and 
most  of  the  provisioning  was  paid  for,  not  by 
local  taxation,  but  from  the  Imperial  Treasury, 
and  His  Majesty  showed  throughout  solicitude  for 
the  welfare  of  his  subjects.  He  allowed  them  to 
approach  him,  and  listened  attentively  to  their 
complaints  against  the  local  officials. 

At  sunset  gunfire,  His  Majesty  prayed,  and 
retired  to  his  tents  for  the  night,  though  almost 
every  evening  he  gave  unofficial  audiences  to  his 
friends  in  the  divided-off  portion  of  his  private 
encampment  reserved  for  this  purpose.  As  night 
fell  the  camp  became  dotted  with  the  little  lights 
of  lanterns,  often  gaily  decorated  with  coloured 
glass,  while  here  and  there  a  camp-fire  showed  up 
ruddily  amongst  the  tents.  Now  and  again  could 
be  heard  the  tinkling  of  stringed  instruments  and 
the  soft  murmur  of  a  singer,  who  seemed  afraid  to 
raise  his  voice  in  the  stillness  that  pervades  every- 
thing,— a  stillness  only  broken  now  and  again  by 
an  order  to  the  guards  and  sentries — of  whom 


64  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

400,  shoulder  to  shoulder,  encircled  the  Sultan's 
enclosure — or  by  the  long-drawn  accents  of  the 
mueddin  as  he  called  the  Faithful  to  prayer. 

The  "  last  post " — and  as  the  note  of  the  bugle 
dies  away,  a  wonderful  silence  fell  upon  the  moon- 
lit camp. 


III. 

THE  ROAD    TO   RUIN. 

BY  the  end  of  1902  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  had  returned 
to  Fez,  desirous  of  introducing  reforms,  and  reck- 
lessly extravagant.  His  intentions  were  the  best ; 
but  if  there  was  one  thing  his  viziers  did  not 
desire  to  see  introduced  it  was  reform,  for  their 
livelihoods  and  their  fortunes  depended  upon  a 
continuance  of  the  state  of  corruption  which  they 
had  every  interest  to  see  prolonged.  So  they 
closed  their  eyes  to  the  young  Sultan's  extrava- 
gances, watched  him  waste  his  own  and  his  coun- 
try's money  on  every  sort  of  folly,  and  shared  in 
the  profits. 

All  sorts  of  rumours  and  stories  were  current 
amongst  the  tribes  as  to  what  went  on  in  the 
palace.  For  instance,  the  Sultan,  finding  the  white 
walls  of  one  of  the  interior  courtyards  too  dazzling 
for  his  eyes,  had  them  painted  blue — an  innova- 
tion unheard  of  at  a  Court  where  tradition  ruled. 
Now  the  walls  of  this  courtyard  were  visible  from 
the  hills  above  Fez,  and  the  patch  of  bright  blue 
soon  attracted  the  attention  of  the  tribesmen 
attending  the  local  markets.  To  them,  as  it  was 

E 


66  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

contrary  to  Moslem  tradition,  it  must  be  of  Chris- 
tian origin,  and  a  story  was  soon  being  circulated 
that  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  had  lost  his  fortune  playing 
cards  with  his  Christian  friends,  and  was  now 
staking  the  various  parts  of  his  palace  in  lieu  of 
money.  He  had  lost  this  particular  court,  which 
the  Christians  had  taken  possession  of  and  painted 
blue.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  at  this  period  playing- 
cards  were  unknown  inside  the  palace,  and  with 
all  his  extravagances  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  never 
showed  the  least  propensity  to  gambling.  All  play 
for  money  is  forbidden  by  the  Moslem  religion, 
and  the  young  Sultan  was  strict  in  the  observances 
of  his  faith. 

The  rumours  of  Christian  influence  spread  fast, 
and  were  soon  taken  advantage  of.  The  Moors 
are  essentially  opportunists,  and  one,  Omar  ez- 
Zarhonni,  was  more  opportunist  than  the  rest. 
He  was  an  educated  man  who  had  been  a  scribe 
at  Court,  but  a  forgery  had  put  an  end  to  his 
career  in  the  precincts  of  the  palace.  For  a  time 
he  was  a  sort  of  secretary  to  Hammou  el-Hassen, 
the  Berber  Kaid  of  the  Beni  Mtir  tribe,  when  I 
knew  him.  In  1901  he  left  the  Kaid  and  dis- 
appeared into  the  country.  Amongst  other  useful 
attainments  he  was  a  skilful  forger,  and  knew  a 
certain  number  of  rather  ordinary  conjuring  tricks. 
He  possessed  as  well  a  most  fluent  tongue.  By 
the  aid  of  these  accomplishments  he  was  able  to 
make  a  living,  travelling  from  tribe  to  tribe  on 
a  she-donkey,  from  which  fact  he  became  known 
along  the  countryside  as  "  Bou  Hamara  " — liter- 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  67 

ally,  the  "Father  of  the  she-donkey."  It  was 
amongst  the  simple  tribesmen  of  the  Rif  that  he 
met  with  his  principal  success.  Starting  with  the 
idea  of  merely  earning  a  livelihood,  he  soon  saw 
the  possibilities  of  a  career  on  a  larger  scale.  His 
conjuring  tricks,  his  wily  tongue,  and  his  forgeries 
— to  say  nothing  of  the  she-donkey — encircled  him 
with  a  sort  of  religious  prestige ;  and  one  day  he 
suddenly  declared  himself  to  be  Mulai  Mohamed, 
the  first-born  son  of  the  late  Sultan  Mulai  Hassen, 
and  therefore  the  elder  brother  of  the  then  reigning 
sovereign,  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz.  For  a  time  he  did 
not  discard  his  donkey,  and  the  humility  of  this 
means  of  transit  added  attractions  to  his  prestige 
in  the  eyes  of  the  devout. 

In  the  late  autumn  of  1902  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz 
left  Fez  for  Rabat.  His  departure  had  been  de- 
layed on  account  of  this  incipient  rebellion  of  Bou 
Hamara's  ;  but  affairs  seemed  to  have  quieted 
down,  and  the  departure  of  the  Court  took  place 
in  November.  An  army  had  been  meanwhile  sent 
in  the  direction  of  Taza  to  put  down  the  rebellion. 
The  choice  of  a  Commander-in-Chief  for  this  army 
was  typical  of  Morocco  of  those  days.  The  situa- 
tion was  critical,  and  the  future  depended  largely 
upon  the  success  of  His  Majesty's  troops.  The 
Sultan  was  leaving  North  Morocco,  and  by  this 
fact  alone  his  position  would  be  weakened ;  but 
the  tradition  of  corruption — accepted  and  per- 
mitted— was  too  great.  I  asked  the  Sultan,  for 
I  was  at  Fez  with  him  at  that  time,  whom  he 
had  chosen  as  Commander-in-Chief.  To  my  aston- 


68  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

ishment  he  replied,  "  My  brother,  Mulai  el-Kebir." 
"  But  he  is  still  a  boy,"  I  replied,  "  and  has  never 
been  a  soldier."  "  True,"  replied  the  Sultan,  "  but 
my  other  brothers  have  all  commanded  expedi- 
tions. It  is  Mulai  el-Kebir's  turn.  He  has  never 
had  a  chance  of  making  a  little  money."  The 
making  of  a  little  money  was,  of  course,  the 
abstraction  of  the  soldiers'  pay  and  extortion 
everywhere.  I  accompanied  the  Sultan  when  he 
left  Fez  in  November.  The  Court  proceeded,  with 
all  its  pomp  and  majesty,  to  Meknes,  where  we 
stayed  a  few  days,  and  then  on  into  the  Zimmour 
country,  where  rebellion  was  rife.  It  is  impossible 
to  say  of  how  many  people  the  rabble  which 
accompanied  the  Sultan  consisted,  but  we  were 
probably  18,000  or  20,000  in  camp,  with  at  least 
half  perfectly  useless  for  warfare.  A  number  of 
Fez  merchants,  who  followed  the  Court  from 
capital  to  capital,  accompanied  the  Sultan,  and 
each  had  his  family  and  retainers  with  him. 
Amongst  other  strange  groups  were  hundreds  of 
beggars,  for  the  most  part  blind,  who  also  migrated 
with  the  Court. 

There  was  some  fighting  in  the  Zimmour  country, 
but  still  more  in  the  Sultan's  camp.  The  incidents 
which  occurred  were  typical  of  the  time  and 
country.  The  Zimmour  tribesmen  decided  to  re- 
sist the  Sultan's  progress  at  a  deep  ravine  which 
crossed  the  plains  at  right  angles  to  our  line  of 
march.  This  ravine  was  perhaps  400  feet  in  depth, 
a  few  yards  wide  only  at  the  bottom,  where  a 
little  river  flowed,  and  half  a  mile  across  at  its 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  69 

summit.  Aware  that  the  army  was  likely  to  meet 
with  resistance  at  this  spot,  a  halt  was  called  on 
the  edge  of  the  valley.  Half-way  up  the  steep 
slope  on  the  opposite  side  was  an  open  ledge  of 
green  grass,  on  which  was  a  group  of  black  tents 
and  thatch  huts  of  the  Zimmour  villagers.  From 
the  thick  brushwood  opposite  a  few  rebel  shots 
were  fired  at  the  army.  The  Sultan's  artillery  and 
machine-guns  were  brought  up  to  the  edge  of  the 
ravine,  and  began  firing  promiscuously  into  the 
brushwood.  It  was  soon  clear  that  the  valley 
was  not  strongly  held.  The  Zimmour  tribesmen 
are  horsemen,  and  their  attack  was  more  likely 
to  be  made  on  the  plain  across  the  ravine,  at  the 
moment  when  the  army  was  extricating  itself  from 
the  precipices  and  brushwood. 

A  regiment — the  Doukkalas — was  ordered  to 
clear  the  valley  in  preparation  for  an  advance, 
and  started  down  the  steep  hillside  with  much 
noise  and  singing.  A  few  shots  were  fired  at  them 
as  they  descended.  The  river  crossed,  they  began 
the  ascent,  and  soon  reached  the  little  deserted 
village.  Here  temptation  was  too  strong,  and 
instead  of  mounting  higher  they  began  to  loot. 
The  villagers  had  carried  off  all  their  movable 
property,  but  their  stores  of  grain  remained,  and 
grain  is  valuable  in  the  Sultan's  camp.  The  ques- 
tion was  how  to  transport  it.  The  Moorish  soldier 
is  not  easily  foiled,  and  the  brave  Doukkala  regi- 
ment was  quite  up  to  the  occasion.  In  the  presence 
of  the  Sultan  and  of  the  whole  army  they  laid 
down  their  rifles,  took  off  their  baggy  uniform 


70  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

breeches  of  bright  blue  cotton,  tied  up  the  holes 
through  which  the  legs  ordinarily  protruded  with 
string,  and  filled  the  rest  with  wheat.  This  done, 
they  loaded  up  their  booty  on  their  backs,  picked 
up  their  rifles,  and  started  to  return  to  the  army. 

Nothing  would  make  them  go  on :  bugles  were 
blown,  signals  made,  orders  shouted ;  but  the 
Doukkalas  felt  that  their  day's  work  was  done, 
and  steadily  climbed  homewards.  In  exasperation 
the  Abda  regiment,  equally  famous  and  equally 
brave,  was  sent  to  support  them,  and  to  see  if 
they  couldn't  be  persuaded  to  turn  once  more  in 
the  direction  of  the  enemy  and  abandon  their 
loot. 

With  music  and  singing  the  Abda  regiment  set 
out.  They  met  the  Doukkalas  struggling  up  under 
their  heavy  loads  near  the  river-bed.  A  collision 
was  inevitable,  and  the  Abda  charged.  The  Douk- 
kalas threw  down  their  loads  and  commenced 
firing,  and  in  a  few  minutes  a  little  battle  was 
raging  far  down  below  us  in  the  ravine  between 
the  two  loyal  regiments.  A  ceasing  of  the  firing 
bespoke  a  compromise.  The  two  bodies  of  troops 
fraternised,  the  Doukkalas  temporarily  abandoned 
their  breeches'  loads  of  grain  on  the  river-bank, 
and  returned  barelegged  to  the  Zimmour  village 
with  their  comrades  the  Abdas.  Once  there  it 
was  the  latter's  turn  to  step  out  of  their  nether 
garments,  and  the  Doukkalas  assisted  them  to 
load  up  the  remaining  grain.  This  done,  the  two 
regiments,  except  for  a  few  killed  and  wounded, 
returned  together,  every  man  bearing  on  his  back 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  71 

his  voluminous  baggy  blue  breeches  stuffed  to 
bursting-point  with  wheat  and  barley.  I  shall 
never  forget  the  sight  of  these  troops  struggling 
up  the  steep  slope,  puffing  and  perspiring,  dressed 
in  the  scarlet  "  zouave  "  coats,  with  just  a  fringe 
of  shirt  encircling  their  waists — and  nothing  else, — 
and  on  the  summit  the  enraged  Sultan  and  his 
Court  and  the  rest  of  the  army,  impotent  to  change 
the  course  of  events.  The  afternoon  was  well 
over,  and  all  thought  of  crossing  the  ravine 
that  night  was  out  of  the  question,  so  the  camp 
was  pitched  on  the  side  we  were  on. 

I  have  passed  many  strange  disturbed  nights  in 
Morocco,  but  this  one  was  perhaps  unique,  for 
the  Doukkalas  and  Abda  regiments  quarrelled 
over  the  division  of  the  spoil,  and  fought  on  and 
off  all  the  night  through.  Bullets  were  flying  in 
every  direction,  and  one  had  to  lie  as  low  to 
ground  as  possible.  Eventually  things  quieted 
down,  and  one  of  my  servants  came  and  announced 
to  me  that  "it  is  all  right.  The  army  is  now 
being  flogged," — which  was  a  fact,  for  the  energetic 
Minister  of  War  had  managed  to  arrest  the  sur- 
vivors of  the  two  regiments  concerned,  and  was 
having  them  individually  severely  flogged  one  after 
the  other  by  soldiers  of  other  regiments  and  slaves 
and  volunteers. 

We  never  crossed  that  ravine.  The  next  day 
the  news  reached  the  Sultan  that  the  army  under 
his  brother  had  been  defeated  by  Bou  Hamara 
near  Taza.  In  all  haste  we  turned  back,  and 
proceeded  once  more  to  Fez.  That  return  journey 


72  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

over  the  track  of  our  advance  brought  to  light 
many  things  of  which  nothing  apparently  had  been 
known,  or  at  least  cared  about,  in  camp.  The 
road  was  strewn  with  dead — stragglers  from  the 
Sultan's  army  who  had  been  cut  off  by  the  rebel 
Zimmours;  for  woe  betide  any  one  who  lagged 
behind.  We  found  in  the  precincts  of  a  country 
mosque  a  dozen  corpses,  decapitated  and  muti- 
lated ;  and  even  the  blind  beggars  on  foot,  whose 
afflictions  made  it  almost  impossible  to  keep  up 
with  the  army,  fell  a  prey  to  the  tribesmen,  and 
not  a  few  were  found  stripped  of  their  poor  belong- 
-\ings  and  with  their  throats  cut.  Woe  betide  the 
wounded,  too — left  to  die  where  they  fell — for  the 
Sultan's  army  possessed  no  hospital  installation  of 
any  kind,  and  no  ambulances.  Every  effort  of 
the  few  doctors  who  from  time  to  time  were 
employed  at  the  Moorish  Court  was  almost  in 
vain.  Only  if  a  fallen  soldier's  comrade  chose  to 
carry  him  to  the  camp  did  he  escape  death  on  the 
field  of  battle ;  but  the  question  of  his  transport 
and  of  his  subsequent  care  rested  entirely  with  his 
comrades,  and  the  Moorish  soldier's  comrades  were 
not  always  prepared  to  make  sacrifices  for  a 
wounded  "  pal."  Often  they  waited  his  death  in 
order  to  steal  his  clothes ;  often  they  stole  his  clothes 
and  left  him  to  perish  without  awaiting  his  death. 
In  camp,  if  there  was  a  doctor,  medical  attend- 
ance was  given,  but  it  was  given  almost  without 
any  encouragement  or  any  help  from  the  Maghzen, 
but  none  the  less  given  whole-heartedly.  Even 
when  the  whole  army  was  attacked  with  malaria, 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  73 

it  was  often  the  doctor  who  supplied  the  entire 
quantity  of  quinine  required  out  of  his  own  pocket. 
The  idea  of  the  value  of  their  men's  lives  never 
seems  to  have  entered  into  the  heads  of  the 
authorities. 

Often  the  soldiers,  if  they  took  the  trouble, 
buried  the  wounded  alive,  to  prevent  their  heads 
being  carried  off  as  trophies  by  the  enemy.  I 
remember  being  told,  while  spending  an  evening 
with  some  of  the  riff-raff  of  the  army — who,  in 
spite  of  their  characters,  were  often  the  most 
jovial  and  cheery  of  companions — the  story  of  a 
recalcitrant  wounded  comrade  who  didn't  want 
to  be  buried  alive.  The  incident  had  happened 
the  same  day.  The  man  was  badly  wounded,  the 
camp  was  a  long  way  off,  and  his  "  pals  "  didn't 
mean  to  have  the  trouble  of  carrying  him  there. 
So  they  dug  his  grave,  and  began  to  push  him  in. 
He  naturally  protested.  "  I  am  not  dead,"  he 
cried ;  "  don't  you  see  I  am  living  ?  "  "Be 
quiet,"  said  a  companion ;  "  you  were  killed  at 
least  an  hour  ago.  Don't  you  realise  that  you  are 
dead  ?  "  The  poor  man  still  cried  out  till  the 
earth  covered  him  and  put  an  end  to  his  protesta- 
tion and  his  life.  The  soldier  who  narrated  the 
incident  added,  "  The  Moorish  soldier  is  an  un- 
grateful and  unbelieving  individual.  This  man,  for 
instance,  had  no  confidence  in  us,  his  comrades, 
when  we  assured  him  he  was  dead.  I  hate  in- 
gratitude,"— and  he  filled  up  his  little  "kif  "  pipe 
and  handed  it  to  us  for  a  whiff. 

Life  was  of  no  value,  but  the  Moorish  soldier  is. 


74  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

I  have  seen  him  often  under  all  circumstances ; 
and  in  spite  of  all  his  faults,  I  have  an  admiration 
and  a  liking  for  him.  He  considered  his  "pal's" 
life  as  nothing,  and  his  own  almost  as  valueless  ; 
and  yet  on  my  many  journeys  I  have  often 
experienced  kindness,  and  never  rudeness,  from 
these  outcasts  of  the  old  regime.  Murderers  often, 
generally  thieves,  and  always  blackguards,  yet 
there  existed  amongst  them  the  undercurrent  of 
the  pride  of  race,  and  a  sense  of  honour  in  their 
dealings  with  a  sympathetic  European,  which  they 
would  have  considered  quite  unnecessary  with  a 
compatriot.  In  all  life  and  on  all  my  journeys 
in  Morocco  I  have  made  a  point  of  trusting  every 
one,  and  seldom,  if  ever,  have  I  been  disappointed. 
I  have  put  natives  taken  from  the  wild  mountain 
districts  into  positions  of  confidence ;  I  have  given 
them  every  facility  to  rob,  but  I  have  trusted  to 
their  honour,  and  they  have  not  failed  me.  I  am 
often  told  I  have  been  and  am  foolish,  and  that 
some  day  ! — but  that  some  day  has  not  come  yet, 
and  my  life  has  been  rendered  far  easier  and  far 
happier  by  the  mutual  confidence  that  has  always 
existed,  and  still,  I  am  glad  to  say,  exists,  between 
the  people  of  this  country  and  myself.  I  start 
out  on  my  journeys  with  this  certain  knowledge, 
that  wherever  I  choose  to  go  I  am  known  at 
least  by  name  and  sure  of  a  welcome. 

A  few  days  after  taking  the  hurried  decision  to 
return,  the  Sultan  reached  Fez,  where  he  remained 
for  several  years,  unable  to  leave  these  disturbed 
regions  where  revolution  was  rife.  In  the  summer 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  75 

of  1903,  having  returned  to  Tangier  meanwhile, 
I  was  captured  by  Raisuli's  tribesmen,  and  spent 
three  weeks  in  captivity  at  Zinat  and  in  the 
Anjera  mountains.  My  experiences  are  narrated 
in  the  chapter  which  deals  with  the  famous  brigand 
and  his  doings. 

In  1904  an  arrangement  was  come  to  between 
France  and  England  regarding  Morocco.  This 
book  does  not  in  any  way  pretend  to  be  a  history, 
and  important  as  this  event  was,  it  need  only 
be  referred  to  here  in  a  few  words.  France  was 
permitted  by  this  agreement  to  intervene  in 
Morocco,  on  the  condition  of  not  changing  the 
political  status  of  the  country,  and  was  given  a 
free  hand  to  preserve  order  and  to  grant  such 
assistance  for  the  introduction  of  certain  reforms 
as  might  be  required.  France  at  the  same  time 
agreed  to  come  to  terms  with  Spain.  All  British 
commercial  rights  and  privileges  were  to  remain 
intact. 

Raisuli  was  all  this  time  in  communication,  if 
not  in  league,  with  Bou  Hamara,  who  remained 
in  the  Taza  and  Oujda  districts.  While  I  was  a 
prisoner  of  Raisuli's  in  1903, 1  managed  to  abstract 
from  a  secret  cupboard  in  the  room  in  which  I  was 
confined  a  number  of  documents  of  considerable 
interest.  One  of  these  was  the  "  dahir  "  of  the 
Pretender  appointing  Raisuli  Governor  of  the 
mountain  tribes  of  North-West  Morocco.  This 
dahir  is  stamped  with  the  great  seal  of  the  Pre- 
tender under  the  name  of  Mohamed  ben  Hassen. 
No  doubt  Raisuli,  who  was  at  this  moment  Mulai 


76  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

Abdul  Aziz's  Governor  in  the  same  districts,  was 
keeping  this  alternative  appointment  up  his  sleeve 
in  a  case  of  the  necessity  arising  of  having  to 
proclaim  the  Pretender  as  Sultan. 

It  was  only  natural  that  this  Anglo-French  agree- 
ment should  bring  about  a  general  spirit  of  unrest 
in  the  country,  and  in  May  1904  Raisuli  captured 
Mr  Perdicaris  and  his  stepson,  Mr  Varley.  They 
were  released  seven  weeks  later  against  a  ransom 
of  £14,000  and  political  advantages  for  Raisuli, 
who  obtained  from  the  Sultan,  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz, 
his  own  appointment  of  Governor  of  the  north- 
west tribes  as  one  of  his  terms. 

Meanwhile  the  situation  in  the  interior  became 
so  serious  that  all  Europeans  were  withdrawn  to 
the  coast,  and  even  at  Tangier  security  was  threat- 
ened. In  December  my  country  villa  was  attacked 
during  the  night,  and  I  narrowly  escaped  a  second 
capture.  The  soldiers  guarding  my  house  were 
seized  and  disarmed  in  the  verandah ;  but  the 
brigands,  under  a  young  chief  called  Ould  Bak- 
kasha,  failed  to  force  an  entrance  into  the  house. 
The  telephone  wire  was  cut,  but  I  had  just  time 
to  get  a  message  through,  and  a  few  hours  later 
troops  arrived.  Our  total  losses  were  one  soldier 
killed  and  one  wounded.  I  had  to  abandon  my 
villa  and  come  and  live  nearer  the  town. 

Ould  Bakkasha,  the  chief  of  this  new  band,  was 
killed  a  few  weeks  later.  He  was  a  young  man, 
of  attractive  manner  and  appearance,  who  evi- 
dently wanted  to  become  a  second  Raisuli ;  but 
fate  was  against  him.  During  a  raid  which  he 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  77 

and  his  men  made  upon  a  village,  he  was  shot. 
He  was  forcing  his  way  into  a  house,  the  owner 
of  which  was  holding  the  door  on  the  inside. 
Unable  to  leave  the  door,  the  owner  of  the  house 
called  to  his  son,  a  mere  boy,  to  bring  him  his 
rifle,  which  was  hanging  on  the  wall.  The  boy 
in  hurrying  to  his  father  fell,  and  the  rifle  went 
off.  The  bullet  pierced  the  closed  door,  and  killed 
Ould  Bakkasha,  who  was  attempting  to  force  an 
entrance  from  without.  The  band  fled,  leaving 
their  chief's  dead  body  on  the  threshold. 

The  year  1905  saw  the  famous  visit  of  the 
Kaiser  to  Tangier,  the  result  of  the  Franco-British 
agreement  of  the  previous  year,  and  of  the  sub- 
sequent action  of  France  in  sending  a  special 
Mission  to  Fez  to  insist  upon  the  introduction  of 
reforms.  It  was  on  31st  March  that  the  Kaiser 
landed.  At  the  last  moment  he  had  hesitated  to 
come  ashore,  partly  on  account  of  the  roughness 
of  the  sea,  and  partly  perhaps  because  he  may 
have  appreciated  the  far-reaching  effects  of  this 
hostile  demonstration  to  France  and  indirectly  to 
England,  and  partly  because  he  feared  assassina- 
tion at  the  hands  of  anarchists. 

The  Emperor  looked  nervous  as  he  rode  through 
the  decorated  streets  to  the  German  Legation. 
Immense  crowds  of  natives,  who  had  been  told 
that  this  visit  meant  the  saving  of  the  indepen- 
dence of  their  country,  had  gathered  on  the  open 
market-place  in  front  of  the  Legation,  and  volley 
after  volley  was  fired  by  them  as  the  Emperor 
arrived  and  left.  Many  of  the  guns  and  rifles 


78  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

contained  bullets,  one  of  which,  in  its  downward 
course,  struck  and  indented  the  leather  helmet  of 
one  of  the  suite,  but  fortunately  no  accident 
occurred.  I  was  in  the  room  while  the  diplomatic 
corps  and  the  native  officials  were  presented  to 
the  Kaiser,  and  heard  both  his  words  to  the 
French  Charge  d' Affaires,  Comte  de  Cherisy,  and 
to  the  Moorish  authorities.  To  both  he  announced 
x^y  his  intention  of  considering  Morocco  as  an  in- 
^j\dependent  country,  and  of  treating  its  Sultan  as 
an  independent  sovereign. 

Fez  became  a  few  months  later  the  scene  of 
action,  for  three  special  Missions — a  British  under 
Mr  (afterwards  Sir  Gerard)  Lowther,  a  French 
Mission  under  Monsieur  Saint  Rene  Taillandier, 
and  a  German  under  Count  Tattenbach — visited 
the  capital.  The  French  Government  was  insisting 
on  the  acceptance  of  its  reform  proposals  by  the 
Sultan,  and  every  assistance  was  being  rendered 
by  the  British  Government  to  obtain  this  desirable 
result ;  but  German  influence  was  too  strong,  and 
the  Sultan  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  definitely  refused  the 
French  proposals  on  28th  May,  only  a  day  or  two 
before  the  arrival  of  the  British  Mission  in  Fez. 
The  moment  was  cleverly  chosen.  Mr  Lowther's 
Mission  was  en  route  to  the  Court,  and  only  learned 
of  the  Sultan's  decision  on  his  arrival  at  Fez.  He 
was  too  late  to  influence  the  Sultan,  and  too  late 
to  abandon  his  Mission.  This  check  to  France  led 
indirectly  to  the  fall  of  Delcasse  and  the  agree- 
ment to  hold  an  International  Conference  on  the 
subject  of  Morocco. 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  79 

Meanwhile  there  was  no  improvement  in  the 
interior  situation  of  Morocco.  Bou  Hamara  main- 
tained his  rebellion  in  Eastern  Morocco,  and  Raisuli 
governed  in  north-eastern  tribes.  Everywhere 
there  was  insecurity,  and  two  British  officers, 
Captain  Crowther  and  Lieutenant  Hatton,  were 
captured  in  October  on  the  shore  of  the  An j  era 
coast,  where  they  were  employed  in  the  salving 
of  H.M.S.  Assistance,  which  had  gone  ashore  there. 
The  brigand  who  made  this  coup  was  the  Shereef 
Ould  Boulaish,  an  important  Anjera  tribesman. 
Their  release  was  fortunately  obtained  without 
much  difficulty. 

The  Court  had  lost  its  prestige.  The  Sultan  was 
openly  scoffed  at  and  despised,  and  anarchy 
reigned  on  every  side. 

This  final  stage  of  the  history  of  independent 
Morocco  had  begun  and  ended  in  the  early  years 
of  this  century,  when  the  young  Sultan,  Mulai 
Abdul  Aziz,  entered  upon  that  period  of  his  reign 
which  may  be  deservedly  known  as  the  years  of 
the  commis  voyageurs.  It  was  a  pitiful  period  and 
one  best  forgotten,  except  that  every  now  and 
again  some  incident  would  occur  worth  recording 
on  account  of  its  perfectly  unintentional  humour, 
which  only  rendered  more  pitiful  still  the  depress- 
ing interludes.  It  was  the  last  decadence  of  the] 
decadent  Moorish  Court.  The  Treasury  was  fast 
being  emptied,  the  revenues  were  being  wasted, 
foreign  loans  were  being  raised,  and  the  palaces 
of  the  Sultan  were  littered  with  packing-cases, 
the  contents  of  which  the  British  Press  once  seri- 


80  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

ously  described  as  "  evidences  of  Christian  civilisa- 
tion at  Fez."  Everywhere  it  was  packing-cases, 
and  even  to-day  on  some  of  the  tracks  from  the 
coast  to  the  interior  lie  the  wrecked  fragments  of 
machinery  and  other  rusty  forsaken  goods,  which 
the  weary  camels  could  transport  no  longer. 

Of  what  did  these  "  evidences  of  Christian  civil- 
isation "  consist  ?  Grand  pianos  and  kitchen- 
ranges  ;  automobiles  and  immense  cases  of  corsets  ; 
wild  animals  in  cages,  and  boxes  of  strange  theatri- 
cal uniforms  ;  barrel-organs  and  hansom-cabs  ;  a 
passenger  lift  capable  of  rising  to  dizzy  altitudes, 
destined  for  a  one  -  storied  palace  ;  false  hair ; 
cameras  of  gold  and  of  silver  with  jewelled  buttons  ; 
carved  marble  lions  and  living  macaw  parrots ; 
jewels,  real  and  false ;  steam-launches  and  fire- 
works ;  ladies'  underclothing  from  Paris,  and 
saddlery  from  Mexico ;  trees  for  gardens  that 
were  never  planted,  or,  if  planted,  were  never 
watered  ;  printing-presses  and  fire-balloons — an 
infinity  of  all  that  was  grotesque,  useless,  and  in 
bad  taste.  As  each  packing-case  gave  forth  its 
contents  they  were  looked  at,  perhaps  played  with, 
and  the  majority  speedily  consigned  to  rust  and 
rot  in  damp  stores  and  damper  cellars.  It  was, 
indeed,  a  glorious  period  for  the  commis  voyageurs, 
but  it  was  the  "  agony "  of  Morocco.  Every 
incident  in  Europe  was  seized  to  push  their  wares. 
The  coronation  of  King  Edward  VII.  brought 
crowns  to  the  fore.  The  Sultan  was  told  he  must 
have  a  crown.  He  objected.  It  was  contrary  to 
his  religion  to  put  gold  or  jewels  on  his  head. 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  81 

But  escape  was  impossible.  A  coloured  oleograph 
was  spread  out  before  him  representing  King 
Edward  in  his  coronation  robes,  standing  by  a 
small  table,  with  his  index  finger  lightly  resting 
on  the  summit  of  the  Imperial  Crown.  This  at 
least  was  a  purpose  to  which  the  Sultan,  without 
infringing  the  tenets  of  Islam,  could  put  a  crown. 
So  the  crown  came. 

The  crown,  it  was  rumoured,  came  from  Paris ; 
but  the  State  coach  was  British,  and  London's 
best,  built  by  a  famous  coach-builder,  and  of  fine 
workmanship.  The  afternoon  that  it  arrived, 
transported  in  packing-cases  carried  on  platforms, 
which  in  turn  were  slung  between  camels,  the 
Sultan  was  playing  bicycle-polo  with  some  of  his 
European  suite,  which  included  at  this  period  an 
architect,  a  conjurer,  a  watchmaker,  an  American 
portrait-painter,  two  photographers,  a  German 
lion-tamer,  a  French  soda-water  manufacturer,  a 
chauffeur,  a  firework  expert,  and  a  Scottish  piper. 
All  these  enjoyed  the  personal  friendship  of  His 
Majesty,  and  the  entree  into  the  presence  of  the 
ruler  who,  with  the  exception  perhaps  of  the 
Grand  Lama  of  Thibet,  should  have  been  the  most 
exclusive  and  the  most  secluded  of  sovereigns. 
It  is  no  wonder  that  the  tribesmen  looked  askance 
on  the  high  palace  walls. 

It  was  a  gorgeous  coach,  of  crimson  lacquer, 
with  gilded  ornamentation.  The  inside  was  lined 
with  rich  green-brocaded  silk,  and  the  hammer- 
cloth  was  of  scarlet  and  gold,  and  bore  what  were 
supposed  to  be  the  Royal  Arms  of  Morocco— as  a 

F 


82  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

fact,  non-existent.  Like  the  coach  itself,  the 
purple  harness,  with  its  gilt  fittings,  was  of  the 
very  best ;  and  together  they  formed  an  ensemble 
as  expensive  as  it  was  utterly  useless,  for  there 
were  no  roads  in  Morocco. 

The  bicycle-polo  ceased,  and  the  Sultan  invited 
the  Consul  of  a  great  foreign  Power,  who  hap- 
pened to  be  at  the  Court,  and  the  writer,  to  come 
and  inspect  his  newest  purchase.  In  the  centre 
of  an  immense  field  of  swampy  grass,  surrounded 
by  high  crenellated  walls,  stood  the  scarlet  car- 
riage. In  this  field  of  many  acres  were  opened 
all  the  packing-cases  which  were  too  large  to  pass 
through  the  gateways  that  led  into  the  interior 
courts  of  the  palace ;  it  served  also  as  a  grazing- 
ground  for  His  Majesty's  menagerie.  In  a  wide 
circle  at  some  little  distance  from  the  State  coach 
stood  a  ring  of  zebras,  emus,  wapiti,  Hindu  cattle, 
apes,  antelope,  and  llamas,  with  a  background 
of  more  timid  flamingos  and  strange  storks  and 
cranes — one  and  all  intent  on  examining,  from  a 
position  of  safety,  the  extraordinary  scarlet  addi- 
tion to  their  numbers  which  had  suddenly  appeared 
among  them. 

The  Sultan  was  evidently  pleased.  As  usual, 
he  said  little  ;  but  he  called  to  one  of  his  officers, 
and  ordered  four  horses  to  be  harnessed  to  the 
coach.  It  had  to  be  explained  to  him  that  no 
horse  in  the  Imperial  stables  had  ever  been  in 
harness,  for  the  Sultan's  previous  purchases  of 
carriages  and  hansom-cabs  lay  rotting  idle  and 
neglected  in  stores  and  cellars.  But  His  Majesty 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  83 

was  not  going  to  be  deprived  of  the  pleasure  of 
seeing  his  coach  in  movement.  Men — soldiers  and 
slaves — were  harnessed  and  told  to  pull.  Slowly 
the  lumbering,  useless,  expensive  but  glorious  State 
coach  began  to  move. 

"  We  will  ride  in  it,"  said  the  Sultan ;  and, 
beckoning  to  the  Consul  of  a  Great  Power  to  get 
up  behind,  he  himself  mounted  to  the  scarlet-and- 
gold  seat  of  honour  on  the  box.  The  writer  rode 
inside.  When  all  were  seated,  the  vehicle  started 
on  its  first  and  last  progress  of  State.  The  soldiers 
and  slaves  sweated  and  puffed  as  the  wheels  sank 
deeper  and  deeper  into  the  swampy  ground,  and 
the  "  progress  "  was  slow  indeed.  Slow,  too,  were 
the  paces  of  the  procession  that  followed  us,  for, 
doubting  but  fascinated,  the  whole  menagerie  was 
in  our  wake,  led  by  an  emu  whose  courage  had 
already  been  proved  by  an  unprovoked  attack 
upon  the  Scottish  piper,  and  by  having  danced  a 
pas-seul  on  the  prostrate  form  of  the  expert  in 
fireworks  a  few  days  previously.  Close  behind 
the  emu  followed  a  wapiti — with  the  mange — and 
then  in  turn  the  zebras,  the  Hindu  cattle,  the 
apes,  gazelles,  and  lastly,  the  timid  llamas,  with 
their  great  luminous  eyes  and  outstretched  necks. 
Away  in  the  background  half  a  dozen  cranes 
were  dancing  and  performing  the  most  absurd 
antics. 

It  rained  that  night,  and  the  next  day  the  little 
lake  of  water  in  which  the  State  coach  stood  was 
purple  from  the  dye  of  the  harness,  and  the  beau- 
tiful hammer-cloth  of  scarlet  and  gold  flapped 


84  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

limp  and  ruined  in  the  wind.    Inside  there  was  a 
pool  of  water  on  the  green-brocaded  seat. 

The  great  fault,  or  misfortune,  of  Mulai  Abdul 
Aziz  was  his  extravagance.  He  was  never  able 
to  realise  the  value  of  money.  He  spent,  in  the 
few  years  since  he  emerged  from  the  seclusion  of 
his  palace  to  take  up  the  reins  of  government,  not 
only  the  whole  revenue  of  his  country,  but  also 
the  savings  of  his  predecessors.  And  what  had 
he  got  for  it  all  ?  A  lot  of  rubbish,  bought  at 
fabulous  prices,  which  was  lying  rotting  and  rust- 
ing in  the  gloomy  cavernous  stores  of  his  various 
palaces  !  He  was  to  blame  for  this  extravagance, 
no  doubt,  but  others  were  to  blame  still  more. 
Those  to  whom  he  looked  for  advice  left  no  stone 
unturned  to  exploit  him.  They  made  their  for- 
tunes, and  left  a  broken  unhappy  Sultan,  whose 
whole  country  was  in  rebellion,  whose  Treasury 
was  exhausted,  to  bear  the  brunt  of  their  sins. 
Mulai  Abdul  Aziz,  full  of  the  vigour  of  youth, 
anxious  to  learn,  anxious  to  reform  his  country, 
anxious  to  do  what  was  right,  had  a  future  be- 
fore him  of  much  useful  work.  His  advisers  took 
his  education  in  hand — and  his  education  cost 
him  dear,  for  his  fortune,  his  influence  with  his 
subjects,  and  his  reputation  had  all  gone.  He 
was  weak  and  young  and  sometimes  stubborn  ; 
but  no  man  ever  lived  whose  intentions  were 
better ;  but  these  intentions  were  warped  and 
frustrated  by  his  advisers.  The  Sultan  had  no 
disinterested  person  about  him ;  no  disinterested 
advice  was  given  him.  He  was  told,  when  he 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  85 

spent  his  money  in  ordering  useless  goods  from  . 
the  various  European  countries,  that  it  gave  satis-  I 
faction  to  the  Governments  of  those  respective  I 
countries  that  he  made  his  purchases  in  their/ 
markets. 

Few  of  the  things  that  he  bought  gave  him  any 
pleasure.  Photography  amused  him  for  a  time  ; 
but  even  this  was  made  a  means  of  exploiting 
him.  A  camera  of  gold  at  £2000  came  from 
London ;  10,000  francs'  worth  of  photographic 
paper  arrived  in  one  day  from  Paris.  His  Majesty 
once  informed  me  that  his  photographic  materials, 
not  including  cameras  and  lenses,  for  one  year 
cost  him  between  £6000  and  £7000  !  He  natu- 
rally did  not  know  what  was  required,  and  left  it 
to  his  commission  agents  to  purchase  the  "  neces- 
sary "  materials.  They  did,  with  a  vengeance. 

But  it  must  not  be  thought  that  the  Sultan 
lived  no  other  life  except  this.  His  frivolity  was 
of  short  duration — an  hour  or  two  perhaps  every 
day ;  but  at  other  times  affairs  of  State  took 
up  his  attention,  though  scarcely  as  much  as 
ought  to  have  been  the  case.  He  could,  too,  on 
occasion  be  remarkably  serious  in  his  conversa- 
tions ;  and  as  he  possessed  a  quick  intelligent 
mind,  much  prone  to  speculation,  his  talk  was 
often  exceedingly  interesting,  and  there  were  many 
occasions  when,  alone  with  him  for  an  hour  or 
two  at  a  time,  he  let  his  words  flow  on  from  sub- 
ject to  subject.  On  the  question  of  religion  he 
was  by  no  means  a  fanatic,  though  in  every  way 
a  strict  and  orthodox  Moslem,  in  spite  of  many 


86  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

stories  to  the  contrary.  His  faults  have  been 
against  the  traditions  of  his  predecessors,  and 
never  against  his  religion,  though  the  two  are  so 
indissolubly  mixed  in  the  minds  of  the  people 
that  they  are  incapable  of  distinguishing  one  from 
the  other,  and  so  the  untrue  rumours  which  were 
spread  broadcast  all  over  Morocco  appeared  as 
based  on  fact.  He  would  never  have  attracted 
attention  and  suspicion  had  he  been  a  little  better 
advised.  The  men  who  bought  him  European 
boots  and  European  saddles,  to  their  own  profit 
and  to  his  unmaking,  were  almost  guilty  of  high 
treason.  The  men  who  ordered  fancy  European 
uniforms  for  him  in  the  European  capitals,  as  well 
as  the  men  who  photographed  him  in  them,  and 
allowed  his  photograph  to  appear  in  the  illustrated 
papers  of  Europe,  could  almost  have  been  tried 
for  attempted  regicide.  From  the  newspaper  to 
the  picture  post-card,  the  "  Commander  of  the 
Faithful,"  the  religious  head  of  Islam  in  North- 
West  Africa,  was  exhibited  in  a  variety  of 
costumes  in  the  Tangier  shop  windows  and  sold 
for  a  halfpenny:  and  this  in  a  country  where 
pictures  are  considered  as  contrary  to  religion. 
That  Mulai  Abdul  Aziz  was  weak  there  is  no 
doubt ;  but  how  easy  it  is  to  be  weak  in  such 
circumstances,  for  every  one  was  pushing  him  on, 
helping  him  day  by  day  to  become  more  and 
more  unpopular,  seeing  his  authority  and  his 
country  slipping  away  from  him — "  educating  " 
him,  in  fact,  for  so  they  called  it,  until  in  the 
end  they  left  him  with  an  empty  Treasury  to 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  87 

bear  the  brunt  of  the  coming  crisis.  Every  com-^\ 
mission  agent  had  his  vizier-partner,  who  recom- 
mended that  particular  agent  and  his  goods,  and 
shared  the  profits.  There  was  no  one,  actually  no 
one,  who  could  make  his  voice  heard  in  the  sur- 
roundings of  intrigue  and — "  education." 

Had  the  men  who  really  influenced  him  pressed 
him  to  stop  buying  instead  of  to  buy,  he  would 
have  done  so,  but  such  was  not  their  obj 
They  kept  back  from  him  the  state  of  the  country, 
and  made  little  of  the  rebellion  which  was  smoulder- 
ing all  around  him.  The  one  man  who  realised 
more  than  the  rest  how  badly  things  were  going 
was  the  only  man  of  energy  at  the  Moorish  Court, 
Sid  Mehdi  el-Menebhi,  who  had  been  a  special  < 
ambassador  at  London  and  Berlin.  He  ventured 
once  or  twice  to  speak  seriously,  but  the  mass  of 
intrigue  against  him  was  too  great.  I  remember 
one  incident  so  well.  It  was  in  December  1902. 
I  was  leaving  Fez  in  the  course  of  a  few  days 
for  Tangier,  when  I  received  from  an  unknown 
country  Moor  news  that  the  Pretender's  forces, 
which,  my  informant  said,  were  very  numerous, 
were  on  the  point  of  attacking  the  camp  of 
the  huge  disorderly  army  which  Mulai  Abdul 
Aziz  had  sent  out  of  Fez  a  day's  march 
to  the  eastward.  I  had  reason  to  believe  this 
news  then,  and  I  have  reason  to  believe  to- 
day that  it  was  sent  me  in  order  that  I  might 
leave  Fez,  for  the  Pretender  at  that  time  intended 
to  follow  his  attack  on  the  camp  with  a  march 
on  the  capital.  My  informant,  an  uneducated 


88  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

countryman,  mentioned,  as  a  guarantee  of  good 
faith,  an  incident  which  had  happened  some  years 
before  at  Meknes,  in  which  I  had  apparently  been 
able  to  render  some  small  service  to  a  Moor  whose 
name  at  that  time  I  did  not  know.  It  was  Jilali 
Zarhouni,  the  Pretender  himself,  who  four  years 
afterwards,  mindful  of  my  little  act,  sent  me  this 
word  of  warning. 

I  reported  the  whole  matter  to  the  Sultan,  whom 
I  saw  alone  that  night,  but  I  could  make  no  impres- 
sion upon  His  Majesty.  He  laughed  at  the  rebel- 
lion and  at  my  fears  for  his  troops,  at  the  Pre- 
tender and  his  reputed  forces.  "  Go,"  he  said,  "  to 
Menebhi,  and  tell  him  from  me  to  give  you  a 
good  dinner,  with  musicians  and  '  kooskoosoo,' 
and  don't  worry  yourself.  Your  fears  are  ground- 
less." Menebhi  gave  me  the  good  dinner,  but  he 
knew  my  fears  were  not  groundless.  We  sat  late 
into  the  night  talking — he  was  Minister  of  War  at 
the  time — and  I  think  he  was  persuaded  that 
some  steps  must  be  taken.  Before  we  parted  we 
had  further  evidence  of  how  serious  things  were 
becoming,  for  a  Shereef,  who  had  relations  at 
Taza,  had  received  news  which  confirmed  my 
estimate  of  the  Pretender's  forces,  though  not  of 
his  proposed  attempt  to  attack  the  Government 
troops. 

The  next  day  I  bade  farewell  to  Mulai  Abdul 
Aziz.  He  was  standing  under  a  great  archway  in 
the  palace.  He  tried  to  persuade  me  to  stay,  but 
for  many  reasons  I  had  to  be  back  in  Tangier  in 
eight  or  ten  days'  time.  We  stood  there  a  while 


THE  MOORISH  COURT  89 

talking,  and  nothing  could  have  been  more  kind 
than  he  was. 

"  I  shall  miss  you  much,"  he  said  ;  "  good-bye," 
and  with  a  shake  of  the  hand  he  left  me.  I  turned 
and  watched  his  tall  figure,  draped  in  white,  until 
he  disappeared  into  the  palace  through  a  gate  in 
the  garden  wall.  It  was  Monday,  22nd  December 
1902.  That  very  evening,  some  forty  miles  away, 
his  whole  army  fled  in  a  panic  before  the  Pre- 
tender's forces,  leaving  their  entire  camp,  artillery, 
stores,  ammunition,  money,  and  transport  in  the 
hands  of  Bou  Hamara. 

The  commander  of  the  Sultan's  forces  that 
suffered  this  severe  defeat  was  Mulai  Abdesalam 
el-Amarani,  His  Majesty's  uncle.  He  was  an 
elderly  and  much-respected  member  of  the  royal 
family,  who,  with  a  brother,  Sid  Mohamed  el- 
Amarani,  had  played  a  considerable  and  worthy 
part  in  Moorish  politics.  That  he  possessed  any 
military  capacity  is  doubtful ;  but  his  name  and 
his  already  proved  political  influence  rendered  him 
a  suitable  person  to  command  such  expeditions, 
on  which  diplomacy  was  always,  if  possible,  pre- 
ferred to  fighting. 

On  my  next  visit  to  Fez,  Mulai  Abdesalam 
el-Amarani  described  to  me  the  attack  of  Bou 
Hamara's  forces  upon  the  camp  of  the  Sultan's 
army.  His  description  of  his  own  terror  was 
pathetic.  "  I  had  no  time,"  he  said,  "  to  collect 
my  valuables,  but  there  were  two  things  I  did 
not  want  to  leave  behind — a  sack  of  money  and 
the  pills  Dr  Verdon  had  given  me  for  my  indiges- 


90  MOROCCO  THAT  WAS 

tion.  The  money  was  beside  my  bed,  the  pills 
under  the  mattress,  and  I  couldn't  find  them  at 
once,  and  between  this  loss  and  my  terror  and  the 
sound  of  firing  in  the  camp  I  had  to  flee.  It  was 
not  until  I  was  on  my  mule  that  I  discovered  that 
in  my  excitement  I  had  forgotten  both  the  money 
and  the  pills." 

